term: Abessive Case, definition: Abessive case is a case that expresses the lack or absence of the referent of the noun it marks.
It has the meaning of the English preposition without.

term: Adjunct, definition: An adjunct, broadly defined, is an optional constituent of a construction.

term: Alternative Question, definition: An alternative question is a question that presents two or more possible answers and presupposes that only one is true.

term: Antithesis Relation, definition: An antithesis relation is a contrast relation in which:

the contrasted propositions express events or states that are incompatible with each other, and
the speaker communicates positive regard (belief or preference) for one or the other.


term: Ablative Case, definition: 



Ablative case is a case that expresses a variety of meanings including:

instrument
cause
location
source
time






term: Adposition, definition: An adposition is a cover term for prepositions and postpositions. It is a member of a closed set of items that:

occur before or after a complement composed of a noun phrase, noun, pronoun, or clause that functions as a noun phrase, and
form a single structure with the complement to express its grammatical and semantic relation to another unit within a clause.


term: Alternative Relation, definition: An alternative relation is an interpropositional relation in which at least one of the connected propositions is held to be true, but not necessarily, or perhaps not even possibly, all of them.

term: Antonomasia, definition: Antonomasia is:

the use of a proper name to stand for something else having an attribute associated with that name, or
the use of a general term to stand for a referent having a proper name.


term: Absolute Adjective, definition: An absolute adjective is an adjective which functions as a noun.

term: Adpositional Phrase, definition: An adpositional phrase is a phrase that has an adposition as its head.

term: Ambiguous Consonant Sequence, definition: An ambiguous consonant sequence is a phonetic string (segment or sequence) that may be interpreted as:

a single consonant, or
two successive consonants.


term: Apostrophe, definition: An apostrophe is an address to:

an absent person, or
a personified abstraction or thing.


term: Absolute Social Deixis, definition: Absolute social deixis is deictic reference to some social characteristic of a referent (especially a person) apart from any relative ranking of referents.

term: Advanced Tongue Root, definition: Advanced tongue root refers to the features of a sound made by drawing the root of the tongue forward. This feature distinguishes between tense vowels as [+ ATR] and lax vowels as [- ATR]

term: Ambiguous Phonetic Transition, definition: An ambiguous phonetic transition is a phonetic segment, found between two distinct segments, that may serve only a connective function phonetically and may, therefore, not be a phonologically distinct segment.

term: Apposition, definition: An apposition is a construction consisting of two or more adjacent units that have identical referents.

term: Absolute Tense, definition: Absolute tense is a tense that refers to a time in relation to the moment of utterance.

term: Adverb (Grammar), definition: An adverb is a lexical category whose members have the same syntactic distribution and typically modify adjectives, other adverbs, verbs, or whole clauses or sentences.

term: Ambiguous Segment, definition: An ambiguous segment is a phone that may or may not function as the nucleus of a syllable.

term: Article, definition: An article is a member of a small class of determiners that identify a noun's

definite or indefinite reference, and
new or given status.


term: Absolute-Relative Tense, definition: Absolute-relative tense is a tense:

that refers to a time in relation to a temporal reference point that, in turn, is referred to in relation to the moment of utterance
in which the time and the reference point are not identical, and
the reference point and the moment of utterance are not identical.


term: Adverb (Linguistics), definition: Here are two senses for adverb:

An adverb, narrowly defined, is a word belonging to a class of words which modify verbs for such categories as:

time
manner
place
direction


An adverb, broadly defined, is a word belonging to a class of words which modify any constituent class of words other than nouns, such as:​

verbs
adjectives
adverbs
phrases
clauses
sentences



Under this definition, the possible type of modification depends on the class of the constituent being modified.

term: Ambiguous Sequence, definition: An ambiguous sequence is a phonetic string, a segment or sequence, that may function as:

two phonological units, or
a single unit.


term: Articulation Process, definition: The articulation process is the modification of sound waves produced by the airstream, phonation, and oral-nasal processes.

term: Absolutive Case, definition: Absolutive case is the case of nouns in ergative-absolutive languages that would generally be the subjects of intransitive verbs or the objects of transitive verbs in the translational equivalents of nominative-accusative languages such as English.

term: Adverbial Clause, definition: An adverbial clause is a clause that has an adverb-like function in modifying another clause.

term: Ambiguous Vowel Sequence, definition: An ambiguous vowel sequence is a phonetic string (segment or sequence) that may be interpreted as a:

diphthong
two separate vowels, or
a vowel and a consonant.


term: Ascertainment Relation, definition: An ascertainment relation is an internal alternative relation in which a following proposition presents an alternative circumstance where a preparatory condition, of the illocutionary act that includes the previous proposition, is not met. The alternative is presented to make a query about the defectiveness or nondefectiveness of the illocutionary act.

term: Abstract Noun, definition: An abstract noun is a noun that denotes something viewed as a nonmaterial referent.

term: Adverbializer, definition: An adverbializer is a subordinating conjunction that:

links a subordinate clause to a main clause
indicates that the subordinate clause has an "adverbial" or interpropositional relation to the main clause, indicating:

purpose
condition
time
location



 

term: Americanist System, definition: The Americanist system is a phonetic alphabet designed by Kenneth L. Pike and Eunice Pike after the model of Edward Sapir and Morris Swadesh.

term: Aspect, definition: Aspect is a grammatical category associated with verbs that expresses a temporal view of the event or state expressed by the verb.

term: Accompaniment As A Semantic Role, definition: Accompaniment is the semantic role of a thing that participates in close association with an agent, causer, or affected in an event.

term: Affix (Grammar), definition: An affix is a bound morpheme which adds lexical or syntactic information to a root or stem.
Some languages have zero affixes, whereby meaning is conveyed by the absence of an affix.

term: Amplification Relation, definition: An amplification relation is an elaboration relation in which a proposition substantially repeats the content of an earlier one and adds further information.

term: Assertive Illocutionary Point, definition: An assertive illocutionary point is an illocutionary point in which the speaker purposes to present that the state of affairs described by the propositional content of the utterance is actual.

term: Account, definition: An account is an explanation as to why a dispreferred second part is given as a response in an adjacency pair.

term: Affix (Linguistics), definition: An affix is a bound morpheme that is joined before, after, or within a root or stem.

term: Analytic Definition, definition: An analytic definition is a description of the range of reference of a lexical unit. This description is made up of a:

generic term identifying the broad category to which it belongs, and
modifying word or phrase which specifies its obligatory components of meaning, thus
	
restricting it to include only the appropriate referents, and
distinguishing it from similar senses and words.




term: Assumptive Mood, definition: Assumptive mood is an epistemic mode that signals the speaker's belief that his statement is based on facts about what is usually the case in such circumstances.

term: Accusative Case, definition: Accusative case is the case in nominative-accusative languages that marks certain syntactic functions, usually direct objects.

term: Affixation, definition: Affixation is the morphological process whereby an affix is attached to a root or stem.

term: Anaphora, definition: Anaphora is coreference of one expression with its antecedent. The antecedent provides the information necessary for the expression’s interpretation.
This is often understood as an expression “referring” back to the antecedent.

term: Attraction Schema, definition: An attraction schema is a force schema in which an object exerts a force on another object, either physically or metaphorically, to pull it toward itself.

term: Acoustic Phonetics, definition: Acoustic phonetics is the study of sound waves made by the human vocal organs for communication.

term: Agent As A Semantic Role, definition: Agent is the semantic role of a person or thing who is the doer of an event.

term: Anaphoric Clitic, definition: An anaphoric clitic is a morphologically bound morpheme that:

refers to a previously mentioned constituent, and
fills the position of a noun phrase in a clause and is in complementary distribution with full noun phrases.


term: Attributable Silence, definition: Attributable silence is conversational silence between turns that is assignable to a particular participant due to his having been selected by the previous speaker to speak next.

term: Active Voice, definition: Active voice is a voice that indicates a subject has the semantic function of actor.

term: Agglutinative Language, definition: An agglutinative language is a language in which words are made up of a linear sequence of distinct morphemes and each component of meaning is represented by its own morpheme.

term: Anchored Entity, definition: An anchored entity is a brand-new entity that is linked to another referent which is not brand new by means of the inclusion of a referring expression in the noun phrase.

term: Attribution Relation, definition: An attribution relation is an elaboration relation in which a proposition describes an attribute of a referent of another proposition.

term: Actual Implicature, definition: An actual implicature is any potential implicature that is not canceled by its context.

term: Agreement, definition: Agreement refers to a formal relationship between elements whereby a form of one word requires a corresponding form of another.

term: Animate Class, definition: An animate class is a category of nouns having human or animal referents.

term: Audience, definition: An audience is one or more persons who are part of the conversational group but who are not presently being addressed.

term: Actual Presupposition, definition: An actual presupposition is any potential presupposition that is not canceled by its context.

term: Alethic Modality, definition: Alethic modality is modality that connotes the speaker’s estimation of the logical necessity or possibility of the proposition expressed by his utterance.

term: Antanaclasis, definition: An antanaclasis is a pun in which a word is repeated with a different meaning each time.

term: Auditory Evidential, definition: An auditory evidential is a nonvisual evidential that signals that the speaker's evidence for the truth of his statement is based on what he has heard.

term: Additive Relation, definition: An additive relation is an interpropositional relation in which the propositions are judged either to be closely related or built one on another.

term: Alienable Noun, definition: An alienable noun is a noun that:

refers to something viewed as not permanently or necessarily possessed, and
is thus not obligatorily expressed as possessed in a language that also has inalienable nouns.


term: Antecedent, definition: An antecedent is a word, phrase, or clause referred to endophorically by another expression which precedes or follows it.

term: Authorized Recipient, definition: An authorized recipient is an addressee, having a unique status or belonging to a socially defined group, with whom one or more distinctive linguistic forms is used.

term: Addressee, definition: An addressee is any of the immediate intended recipients of the speaker's communication, as grammaticalized in second person morphemes.

term: Allative Case, definition: Allative case is a case that expresses motion to or toward the referent of the noun it marks.

term: Anthimeria, definition: Anthimeria is the use of a member of one word class as if it were a member of another, thus altering its meaning.

term: Authorized Speaker, definition: An authorized speaker is a speaker that belongs to a socially defined group for whom the use of a distinctive class of linguistic forms is reserved.

term: Addressee Honorific, definition: An addressee honorific is an honorific in a system in which a level of status of the addressee relative to the speaker is expressed through a choice made among linguistic alternants, irrespective of whether the alternants refer to the addressee.

term: Allegory, definition: An allegory is an extended metaphor, especially a story in which fictional characters and actions are used to understand and express aspects of concepts relating to human existence.

term: Anthology, definition: An anthology is a collection of of poems, stories, songs, articles, or other literary passages chosen by a compiler.

term: Autosegmental Phonology, definition: Autosegmental phonology is a non-linear approach to phonology that allows phonological processes, such as tone and vowel harmony, to be independent of and extend beyond individual consonants and vowels.
As a result, the phonological processes may influence more than one vowel or consonant at a time.

term: Adjacency Pair, definition: An adjacency pair is a unit of conversation that contains an exchange of one turn each by two speakers. The turns are functionally related to each other in such a fashion that the first turn requires a certain type or range of types of second turn.

term: Allomorph, definition: An allomorph is one of two or more complementary morphs which manifest a morpheme in its different phonological or morphological environments.

term: Anticipatory Illocution, definition: An anticipatory illocution is an illocutionary act that has the direct illocutionary force of a question about the conditions necessary for the appropriateness of some other illocutionary act. The anticipatory illocution thus has the indirect illocutionary force of the latter.

term: Auxesis, definition: Auxesis is an exaggeration of the importance of a referent by the use of a referring expression that is disproportionate to it.

term: Adjective, definition: An adjective is a word that belongs to a class whose members modify nouns. An adjective specifies the properties or attributes of a noun referent.

term: Allophone, definition: An allophone is a phonetic variant of a phoneme in a particular language.

term: Antipassive Voice, definition: Antipassive voice is a voice in an ergative-absolutive language in which:

a noun phrase that normally has ergative case instead has absolutive case
a noun phrase that normally has absolutive case is marked as an oblique or an indirect object, and
the salience of the normally absolutive noun phrase is, according to some analysts, decreased.


term: Auxiliary Verb, definition: An auxiliary verb is a verb which:

accompanies the lexical verb of a verb phrase, and
expresses grammatical distinctions not carried by the lexical verb, such as
	
person
number
tense
aspect, and
voice.




term: Background Relation, definition: A background relation is an interpropositional relation in which one or more propositions are provided as information necessary for the proper understanding of some other proposition(s).

term: Biconditional Relation, definition: A biconditional relation is a relation between a consequent and a condition. The consequent is true or in force if and only if the condition is true, with the result that there is a conditional relation in both directions between the related propositions.

term: Bound Root, definition: A bound root is a root which cannot occur as a separate word apart from any other morpheme.

term: Brand-New Entity, definition: A brand-new entity is a referent that:

has not been mentioned previously in the discourse
is assumed by the speaker to be previously unknown to the addressee


term: Balance Schema, definition: A balance schema is a force schema that:

provides an understanding of physical or metaphorical counteracting forces

is based on a prototypical schema consisting of countervailing forces acting on a target that is a:

point
line
plane



is based on bodily experience, such as maintaining

erect posture
normal bodily states, such as temperature



may be applied metaphorically to provide an understanding of other experiences, such as balance of the visual field with respect to art



term: Blockage Schema, definition: A blockage schema is a force schema in which a force is physically or metaphorically stopped or redirected by an obstacle.

term: Bound Stem, definition: A bound stem is a stem which cannot occur as a separate word apart from any other morpheme.

term: Breathy Vowel, definition: A breathy vowel is one produced by allowing a great deal of air to pass through a slightly open glottis, the aperture between the vocal chords.

term: Beginning-Postspan Relation, definition: A beginning–postspan relation is a temporal relation in which an event or state is expressed as marking the initiation of a durative event or state.

term: Blocking Circumstance, definition: A blocking circumstance is a factor, sometimes expressed along with a concession relation, that:

thwarts an expected event or state
results in an unexpected event or state


term: Bounded Deixis, definition: Bounded deixis is place deixis that has a component of meaning indicative of a border.

term: Bystander, definition: A bystander is a person in a participant role of audience or unratified participant.

term: Benefactive Case, definition: Benefactive case is a case that expresses that the referent of the noun it marks receives the benefit of the situation expressed by the clause.

term: Bound Morpheme, definition: A bound morpheme is a grammatical unit that never occurs by itself, but is always attached to some other morpheme.

term: Boundedness, definition: Boundedness is the presence or absence of a component of meaning indicative of a border at the location indicated in an expression of place deixis.

term: Bystander Honorific, definition: A bystander honorific is an honorific in which the social status of some other person present is expressed through choices made among linguistic alternants. These choices:

are made based upon the person’s relationship to the speaker

do not depend on whether

the alternants refer to the person
the person is the addressee






term: Beneficiary As A Semantic Role, definition: A beneficiary is the semantic role of a referent which is advantaged or disadvantaged by an event.

term: Cardinal Numeral, definition: A cardinal numeral is a numeral of the class whose members are:

considered basic in form
used in counting
used in expressing how many objects are referred to


term: Coding Time, definition: Coding time is the time of

an utterance, or
the writing of a message.


term: Conceptual Extendedness, definition: Conceptual extendedness is a semantic relationship between senses of a lexeme as currently recognized by speakers of a language.
The progressive derivation of more figurative senses from the basic literal sense can be divided into three stages:

primary
secondary
figurative

In LinguaLinks, a sense in the lexical database may be classified by one of these categories to help in comparing it with other senses. The relationship of a particular sense to the primary sense, however, is somewhere on a continuum of conceptual extendedness. The classification is subjective, therefore, and should not be considered precise.

term: Contrast In Identical Environments, definition: Contrast in identical environments is the difference between two phonetically similar segments that occur in two separate words and have identical adjacent sounds.
If neither segment has been modified or affected by its environment, the segments are separate phonemes.

term: Case, definition: Case is a grammatical category determined by the syntactic or semantic function of a noun or pronoun.

term: Collateral Information, definition: Collateral information expresses a nonevent, something that did not or has not yet happened.

term: Concession Relation, definition: A concession relation is a relation of unexpectedness between propositions. Some proposition(s) in the relation are expressed as unexpected (the contraexpectation) in light of some other proposition(s) (the concession).

term: Contrast Relation, definition: A contrast relation is an interpropositional relation which expresses that a difference between one proposition and another is relevant.

term: Cataphora, definition: Cataphora is the coreference of one expression with another expression which follows it. The following expression provides the information necessary for interpretation of the preceding one.
This is often understood as an expression “referring” forward to another expression.

term: Collective Noun, definition: A collective noun is a noun that refers to a group of entities that may be considered either as individuals or as one larger entity.

term: Concrete Noun, definition: A concrete noun is a noun that refers to what is viewed as a material entity.

term: Contrastive Analysis, definition: Contrastive analysis is an inductive investigative approach based on the distinctive elements in a language.

term: Causal Relation, definition: A causal relation is an interpropositional relation in which the situation expressed by some proposition(s) is communicated as bringing about:

the situation expressed by some other proposition(s) (an external relation), or
the usage of some other proposition(s) in a reasoning or argument from a premise (an internal relation)


term: Collocate, definition: Collocates are lexemes that co-occur with each other in natural texts.

term: Conditional Relation, definition: A conditional relation is a logical relation in which the illocutionary act employing one of a pair of propositions is expressed or implied to be true or in force if the other proposition is true.

term: Conventional Implicature, definition: Conventional implicature is an implicature that is:

part of a lexical item’s or expression’s agreed meaning, rather than derived from principles of language use, and
not part of the conditions for the truth of the item or expression.


term: Comitative Case, definition: Comitative case is a case expressing accompaniment.
It carries the meaning "with" or "accompanied by."

term: Conjunction, definition: A conjunction is a word that:

syntactically links words or larger constituents, and
expresses a semantic relationship between them.

A conjunction is positionally fixed relative to one or more of the elements related by it, thus distinguishing it from constituents such as English conjunctive adverbs.

term: Conventional Metaphor, definition: A conventional metaphor is a metaphor that is commonly used in everyday language in a culture to give structure to some portion of that culture’s conceptual system.

term: Causative Case, definition: Causative case is a case which expresses that the referent of the noun it marks is the cause of the situation expressed by the clause.

term: Command, definition: Here are two senses for command:

A command is an illocutionary act that has the directive illocutionary point of getting another to do or not to do something.
A command is a syntactic sentence type in a language that is used primarily to express such illocutionary acts, and is described as having imperative form.


term: Conjunctive Adverb, definition: A conjunctive adverb is an adverb that functions like a conjunction by expressing the relationship between independent sentences.

term: Conventional Metonymy, definition: A conventional metonymy is a metonymy that is commonly used in everyday language in a culture to give structure to some portion of that culture’s conceptual system.

term: Causer As A Semantic Role, definition: Causer is the semantic role of the referent which instigates an event rather than actually doing it.

term: Comment, definition: A comment is the portion of a sentence that provides information about the topic.

term: Conjunctive Illocutionary Act, definition: A conjunctive illocutionary act is a complex illocutionary act that consists of the performance of two or more illocutionary acts in one utterance.

term: Conversation Analysis, definition: Conversation analysis is an approach to the study of natural conversation, especially with a view to determining the following:

Participants’ methods of

turn-taking
constructing sequences of utterances across turns
identifying and repairing problems, and
employing gaze and movement




How conversation works in different conventional settings


term: Center-Periphery Schema, definition: A center–periphery schema is an image schema involving:

a physical or metaphorical core and edge
degrees of distance from the core


term: Commissive Illocutionary Point, definition: A commissive illocutionary point is the illocutionary point of a speaker committing to bring about the state of affairs described in the propositional content of the utterance.

term: Conjunctive Verb, definition: A conjunctive verb is a verb form which is used specifically in a conjoined clause.

term: Conversational Implicature, definition: Conversational implicature is a nonconventional implicature based on an addressee’s assumption that the speaker is following the conversational maxims or at least the cooperative principle.

term: Centrifugal, definition: A centrifugal is an expression of place deixis that has a component of meaning indicating movement away from a deictic center.

term: Commissive Modality, definition: Commissive modality is a deontic modality that connotes the speaker's expressed commitment, as a promise or threat, to bring about the proposition expressed by the utterance.

term: Connective, definition: Here are two senses of connective:

A connective, in its most common usage, is an expression having a function similar to that of a conjunction.
A connective, broadly defined, is any linguistic unit that links two other constituents together.
	​Examples: Conjunctions, Copulas, Conjunctive adverbs


term: Conversational Maxim, definition: A conversational maxim is any of four rules which were proposed by Grice 1975, stating that a speaker is assumed to make a contribution that:

is adequately but not overly informative (quantity maxim)
the speaker does not believe to be false and for which adequate evidence is had (quality maxim)
is relevant (maxim of relation or relevance), and
is clear, unambiguous, brief, and orderly (maxim of manner).


term: Centripetal, definition: A centripetal is an expression of place deixis which has a component of meaning indicating movement toward a deictic center.

term: Commitment Between Illocutionary Acts, definition: Commitment between illocutionary acts is a condition in which the speaker's commitment to one illocutionary act necessarily means the commitment to some other illocutionary act, regardless of the context of utterance.

term: Consonant, definition: A consonant is a sound made by a partial or complete closure of the vocal tract.

term: Cooperative Principle, definition: The cooperative principle is a principle of conversation that was proposed by Grice 1975, stating that participants expect that each will make a “conversational contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange.”

term: Cessative Aspect, definition: Cessative aspect is aspect that expresses the cessation of an event or state.

term: Common Noun, definition: A common noun is a noun that signifies a nonspecific member of a group.

term: Consonant Modification, definition: A consonant modification is an addition or alteration to the basic way that a consonant is articulated.

term: Coordinate Clause, definition: A coordinate clause is a clause belonging to a series of two or more clauses which:

are not syntactically dependent one on another


are joined by means of
	
a coordinating conjunction
a connective
parataxis




term: Chain Of Illocutionary Commitments, definition: A chain of illocutionary commitments is a set of illocutionary acts which are ordered by the relationship of commitment between acts.

term: Complement, definition: Traditionally, a complement is a constituent of a clause, such as a noun phrase or adjective phrase, that is used to predicate a description of the subject or object of the clause.
Definition 2:
In generative syntax, a complement is a phrasal or clausal category which is selected (subcategorized) by the head of a phrase.

term: Constituent, definition: A constituent is one of two or more grammatical units that enter syntactically or morphologically into a construction at any level.

term: Coordinating Conjunction, definition: A coordinating conjunction is a conjunction that links constituents without syntactically subordinating one to the other.

term: Circular Definition, definition: A circular definition is a description of the meaning of a lexeme that is constructed using one or more synonymous lexemes that are all defined in terms of each other.

term: Complement Clause, definition: A complement clause is a notional sentence or predication that is an argument of a predicate.

term: Construction, definition: A construction is an ordered arrangement of grammatical units forming a larger unit.

term: Copula, definition: A copula is an intransitivity verb which links a subject:

to a noun phrase
adjective, or
other constituent which expresses the predicate.


term: Circumfix, definition: A circumfix is an affix made up of two separate parts which surround and attach to a root or stem.
The morphological process whereby this is achieved is called circumfixation.

term: Complementary Distribution, definition: Complementary distribution is the mutually exclusive relationship between two phonetically similar segments. It exists when one segment occurs in an environment where the other segment never occurs.

term: Container Metaphor, definition: A containment metaphor is an ontological metaphor in which some concept is represented as:

having an inside and outside, and
capable of holding something else.


term: Core Argument, definition: A core argument of a verb is a subject, direct object, or indirect object.

term: Circumfixation, definition: Circumfixation is a morphological process whereby an affix made up of two separate parts surrounds and attaches to a root or stem.

term: Complementizer, definition: A complementizer is a conjunction which marks a complement clause.

term: Containment Schema, definition: A containment schema is an image schema that involves a physical or metaphorical

boundary
enclosed area or volume, or
excluded area or volume.


term: Coreference, definition: Coreference is the reference in one expression to the same referent in another expression.

term: Classifier, definition: A classifier is a word or affix that expresses the classification of a noun.

term: Complex Illocutionary Act, definition: A complex illocutionary act is an illocutionary act that:

has a negated illocutionary force
is performed conditionally, or
is conjoined with another illocutionary act


term: Context Of An Expression, definition: The context of an expression or a text is the social situation in which something is said. It includes any information relevant to understanding the appropriate use of an expression or the interpretation of a text.

term: Correction Relation, definition: A correction relation is an antithesis relation in which the speaker's expression of positive regard reinforces, redefines, or corrects one or the other of the contrasted propositions or groups of propositions.

term: Clausal Implicature, definition: A clausal implicature is a quantity implicature which is inferred by an addressee concerning the truth of a proposition expressed in a particular subordinate or coordinate clause. The addressee infers that the proposition may or may not be true.
The complex or compound sentence of which the clause is a part does not indicate whether the proposition expressed by the clause is true or false.

term: Complex Sentence, definition: A complex sentence is a sentence which includes:

at least one main clause, and
at least one subordinate clause.


term: Continuant, definition: A continuant is a sound produced with an incomplete closure of the vocal tract.

term: Correlative Conjunction, definition: A correlative conjunction is either of a pair of coordinating conjunctions used in ordered fashion. Typically, one is used immediately before each member of a pair of constituents.

term: Clause, definition: A clause is a grammatical unit that:

includes, at minimum, a predicate and an explicit or implied subject
expresses a proposition.


term: Compound, definition: A compound is a word containing a stem that is made up of more than one root.

term: Continuer, definition: A continuer is a move that returns speakership to another participant.
It shows that the speaker:

recognizes that the other participant is forming a lengthy unit of talk, and
allows the participant to continue.


term: Count Noun, definition: A count noun is a noun whose possible referents are thought of as separate entities.
It thus has the ability:

to take a plural form

to occur with distinctive determiners (such as a/an, many), and

to occur with cardinal numerals.

It does not have the ability, however, to occur with a determiner such as much.

term: Clause Chain, definition: A clause chain is a group of clauses in which:

one clause, typically the final clause, is distinguished from the other clauses, typically medial clauses, by a difference of verb morphology, and
each medial clause is marked to show whether or not its subject is the same as the subject of some reference clause. The reference clause may follow it or may be the final clause in the chain.


term: Compound Discourse, definition: A compound discourse is a discourse that contains sections belonging to two or more kinds of discourse.

term: Continuous Aspect, definition: Continuous aspect is an imperfective aspect that expresses an ongoing, but not habitual, occurrence of the state or event expressed by the verb.

term: Counteragent As A Semantic Role, definition: A counteragent is the semantic role of a force or resistance against which an action is carried out.

term: Cleft Sentence, definition: A cleft sentence is a complex sentence in which a simple sentence is expressed using a main clause and a subordinate clause. In English the prototypical cleft sentence has the following form:

it + be + X + subordinate clause

X can be a constituent of one of many varieties.

term: Compound Predicate, definition: A compound predicate is a predicate containing two or more coordinate or paratactic verbs or verb phrases.

term: Contoid, definition: A contoid is a sound made with enough closure of the oral cavity to produce audible friction in the mouth.
It has the potential to be analyzed phonemically as a consonant.

term: Counterfactual Conditional Relation, definition: A counterfactual conditional relation is a conditional relation in which the form of expression of the antecedent and consequent marks them as imagined, nonfactual states or events.

term: Clitic (Grammar), definition: A clitic is a morpheme that has syntactic characteristics of a word, but shows evidence of being phonologically bound to another word.

term: Compound Sentence, definition: A compound sentence is a sentence composed of two or more coordinate clauses.

term: Contraction Relation, definition: A contraction relation is an interpropositional relation in which information previously expressed is partially restated.

term: Counterforce Schema, definition: A counterforce schema is a force schema that involves the active meeting of physically or metaphorically opposing forces.

term: Close Future Tense, definition: Close future tense is a tense that refers to a time shortly after the moment of utterance.

term: Compulsion Schema, definition: A compulsion schema is a force schema that involves an external force physically or metaphorically pushing, or tending to push, an object.

term: Contrast In Analogous Environments, definition: Contrast in analogous environments is the difference between two phonetically similar segments that occur in two separate words and have similar adjacent sounds.

term: Cycle Schema, definition: A cycle schema is an image schema which involves repetitious events and event series.
Its structure includes the following:

A starting point
A progression through successive events without backtracking
A return to the initial state

The schema often has superimposed on it a structure that builds toward a climax and then goes through a release or decline.

term: Closed Class, definition: A closed class is a grammatical class of words with limited membership. These words have primarily grammatical meaning.

term: Dative As A Semantic Role, definition: Dative is the semantic role of a referent that is conscious of being affected by the state or action identified by the verb.

term: Deixis, definition: Deixis is reference by means of an expression whose interpretation is relative to the (usually) extralinguistic context of the utterance, such as:

who is speaking
the time or place of speaking
the gestures of the speaker
the current location in the discourse


term: Development Lexical Relation, definition: A development lexical relation is an association between lexical units which refers to stages or steps in a process involving change such as

expansion, and
growth.

 



Underlying structure:


 

A development set has the structure of a scale.



 




See:

What is a lexical relation with a scale structure for other examples of similar lexical relations in English.
 









term: Discourse Schema, definition: A discourse schema (plural: schemata) is a sequenced group of text elements that is categorized by the text's genre.

term: Dative Case, definition: Dative case is a case that marks any of the following:

Indirect objects (for languages in which they are held to exist)
Nouns having the role of:​

recipient (as of things given)
beneficiary of an action
possessor of an item




term: Delative Case, definition: Delative case is a case which expresses motion downward from the referent of the noun it marks.

term: Dialogue Discourse, definition: Dialogue discourse is a compound discourse that contains both narrative discourse and repartee discourse.

term: Dismissive Relation, definition: A dismissive relation is an interpropositional relation which communicates the irrelevancy of some proposition(s) to some other(s) without communicating contraexpectation.

term: Declarative Illocutionary Point, definition: A declarative illocutionary point is an illocutionary point in which, by making an utterance, a speaker brings into existence the state of affairs described in the propositional content of the utterance.

term: Delay, definition: A delay is an item used to put off a dispreferred second part.

term: Different Subject Marker, definition: A different subject marker is a marker in the verb morphology of a clause which indicates that the subject of the clause is not the same as the subject of some other clause. The other clause is maybe:

a following clause
the final clause in a clause chain, or
the main clause in a sentence.


term: Dispreferred Second Part, definition: A dispreferred second part is a second part of an adjacency pair that

consists of a response to the first part that is generally to be avoided, and
is likely to be marked by such features as
	
delays
prefaces, and
accounts.




term: Declarative Mood, definition: Declarative mood is an epistemic mood that signals that the proposition expressed by a speaker’s utterance is offered as an unqualified statement of fact.

term: Deliberative Mood, definition: Deliberative mood is a directive mood which signals the speaker's request for instruction from the addressee as to whether to do the proposition expressed in the utterance.

term: Diphthong, definition: A diphthong is a phonetic sequence, consisting of a vowel and a glide, that is interpreted as a single vowel.

term: Distal, definition: A distal is a distinction in place deixis that indicates location far from the speaker or other deictic center.

term: Deductive Mood, definition: Deductive mood is an epistemic mood that signals that the speaker judges from other facts that the proposition expressed by his utterance is probably true.

term: Demonstrative, definition: A demonstrative is a determiner that is used deictically to indicate a referent's spatial, temporal, or discourse location.
A demonstrative functions as:

a modifier of a noun, or
a pronoun.


term: Direct Illocution, definition: A direct illocution is an illocutionary act in which only the illocutionary force and propositional content literally expressed by the lexical items and syntactic form of the utterance are communicated.

term: Distributive Aspect, definition: Distributive aspect is an iterative aspect which expresses that an event is applied to members of a group one after another. These members are typically the referents named by:

the subject of an intransitive verb, or
the object of a transitive verb.


term: Defective Illocutionary Act, definition: A defective illocutionary act is an illocutionary act, whether successful or unsuccessful, in which one or more of the preparatory or sincerity conditions for the act are not met.

term: Deontic Modality, definition: Deontic modality is modality that connotes the speaker's

degree of requirement of
desire for, or
commitment to the realization of

the proposition expressed by the utterance.

term: Direct Object, definition: A direct object is a grammatical relation that exhibits a combination of certain independent syntactic properties, such as the following:

The usual grammatical characteristics of the patient of typically transitive verbs
A particular case marking
A particular clause position
The conditioning of an agreement affix on the verb
The capability of becoming the clause subject in passivization
The capability of reflexivization

The identification of the direct object relation may be further confirmed by finding significant overlap with similar direct object relations previously established in other languages. This may be done by analyzing correspondence between translation equivalents.

term: Distributive Numeral, definition: A distributive numeral is a numeral which expresses a group of the number specified.

term: Defective Verb, definition: A defective verb is a verb which does not exhibit all the forms typical of a regular verbal conjugation.

term: Dependent Of A Phrase, definition: The dependent of a phrase is any element in a phrase that does not refer to the same entity that the whole phrase refers to.

term: Direct Speech, definition: Direct speech is quoted speech that is presented without modification, as it might have been uttered by the original speaker.

term: Ditransitivity, definition: Ditransitivity is a term which describes a verb or clause which takes two objects.

term: Definite Concessive Relation, definition: A definite concessive relation is a concession relation in which the clause expressing the concession is marked by a concessive subordinator that expresses the meaning “in spite of the fact that.”

term: Derivation, definition: Derivation is the formation of a new word or inflectable stem from another word or stem. It typically occurs by the addition of an affix.
The derived word is often of a different word class from the original. It may thus take the inflectional affixes of the new word class.

term: Directive Illocutionary Point, definition: A directive illocutionary point is an illocutionary point in which the speaker attempts to get someone to bring about the state of affairs described by the propositional content of the utterance.

term: Diversion Schema, definition: A diversion schema is a force schema that involves forces that physically or metaphorically meet and produce a change of direction.

term: Definite Identifiability, definition: Definite identifiability is a kind of definiteness which indicates that an expression’s referent(s) is in some way identifiable to both speaker and addressee.
The referent is identifiable because of a shared knowledge or situation, including a previous mention of the referent.

term: Derivational Affix, definition: A derivational affix is an affix by means of which one word is formed (derived) from another. The derived word is often of a different word class from the original.

term: Directive Modality, definition: Directive modality is a deontic modality that connotes the speaker’s degree of requirement of conformity to the proposition expressed by an utterance.

term: Double Stop, definition: A double stop consists of simultaneous labial and velar articulation.

term: Definiteness, definition: Definiteness is a category concerned with the grammaticalization of identifiability and nonidentifiability of referents on the part of a speaker or addressee.

term: Derivative, definition: A derivative is a stem that is formed by combining a root with an affix that adds a component of meaning that is more than just inflectional.
The meaning of a derivative is determined by its context, not its parts.

term: Discontinuous Constituents, definition: Discontinuous constituents are constituents which are

separated from each other by one or more intervening constituent, and
considered either
	
syntactically contiguous and unitary, or
realizing the same, single meaning.




term: Downgrade, definition: A downgrade is a move that weakens or mitigates a previous utterance in order to make it more acceptable.

term: Definition, definition: A definition is a thorough description of the meaning of a lexical unit.
Here are the parts of a definition:

Synthetic component consisting of the following:

Analytic definition
Supplemental information


Translation equivalents (in bilingual definitions) or near synonyms (in monolingual definitions)


term: Description Relation, definition: A description relation is an elaboration relation in which a proposition(s) provides the “contents” of an act of perception or cognition expressed by another proposition.

term: Discontinuous Morpheme, definition: A discontinuous morpheme is a morpheme that is interrupted by the insertion of another morphological unit.

term: Dual Number, definition: Dual number is number which refers to two members of the class identified by the noun.

term: Deictic Center, definition: A deictic center is a reference point in relation to which a deictic expression is to be interpreted.

term: Descriptive Text, definition: A descriptive text is a text which lists the characteristics of something.
 



Features


 


The topic is usually about the attributes of a thing.
Third person pronoun forms are used.

 





term: Discourse, definition: A discourse is an instance of language use whose type can be classified on the basis of such factors as grammatical and lexical choices and their distribution in

main versus supportive materials
theme
style, and
the framework of knowledge and expectations within which the addressee interprets the discourse.


term: Dubitative Mood, definition: Dubitative mood is an epistemic mood which signals a speaker’s reservation about the accuracy of his or her statement.

term: Deictic Expression, definition: A deictic expression is an expression that has a deictic usage as its basic usage, though it may also have nondeictic usages.

term: Determiner, definition: A determiner is a word or affix that belongs to a class of noun modifiers that expresses the reference, including quantity, of a noun.

term: Discourse Deixis, definition: Discourse deixis is deictic reference to a portion of a discourse relative to the speaker's current “location” in the discourse.

term: Dummy Word, definition: A dummy word is a grammatical unit that has no meaning, but completes a sentence to make it grammatical.

term: Echo Question, definition: An echo question is a question that

occurs in the turn after a repairable utterance, and
repeats the portion felt by the speaker to need repair.


term: Enablement Schema, definition: An enablement schema is a force schema that involves having:

the physical or metaphorical power to perform some act
a potential force and the absence of blockage or counterforce


term: Etymology, definition: Etymology is the study of the origins and history of the form and meaning of words.

term: Existential Marker, definition: An existential marker is a word, found in a distinct clause type, which marks a referent's existence.

term: Elaboration Relation, definition: An elaboration relation is an interpropositional relation in which a proposition(s) provides detail relating to some aspect of another proposition.

term: Enclitic, definition: An enclitic is a clitic that is phonologically joined at the end of a preceding word to form a single unit.

term: Euphemism, definition: A euphemism is a metaphorical or metonymic use of an expression in place of another expression that is disagreeable or offensive.

term: Exocentric Construction, definition: An exocentric construction is a construction that does not contain any head element that is capable of being a syntactically adequate substitution for the whole construction.

term: Elative Case, definition: Elative case is a case expressing motion out of or away from the referent of the noun it marks.

term: End-Of-Path Schema, definition: An end-of-path schema is an image schema in which a location is understood as the termination of a prescribed path.

term: Evaluation Information, definition: Evaluation information is a movable non-event within a discourse that consists of a speaker's feeling toward an event or a state of affairs. It may have broad scope (such as toward a series of events) or narrow scope (such as toward a participant).

term: Exophora, definition: Exophora is reference of an expression directly to an extralinguistic referent.
The referent does not require another expression for its interpretation.

term: Elementary Illocutionary Act, definition: An elementary illocutionary act is an illocutionary act that:

does not have a negated illocutionary force
is not performed conditionally
is not conjoined to another illocutionary act


term: Endocentric Construction, definition: An endocentric construction is a construction that contains:

a head, which is the single obligatory element in the construction (except in coordinate constructions, which have multiple heads)
one or more optional elements subordinate to the head

The optional elements can, in the proper context, be omitted without loss of grammaticality. The head is a syntactically adequate substitution for the whole construction.

term: Evaluation Relation, definition: An evaluation relation is an interpropositional relation in which a proposition(s) expresses the speaker’s value judgment regarding the factuality or desirability of another proposition(s).

term: Experiencer As A Semantic Role, definition: Experiencer is the semantic role of an entity (or referent) which

receives
accepts
experiences, or
undergoes the effect of an action.


term: Elicitation, definition: Elicitation is the act of obtaining language data from another person.

term: Endophora, definition: Endophora is coreference of an expression with another expression either before it or after it. One expression provides the information necessary to interpret the other.

term: Event, definition: An event is a kind of information in discourse that:

actually occurs,
is overt 
occurs at the now point on the time line


term: Experiential Perfect Aspect, definition: Experiential perfect aspect is a grammaticalization of the current relevance, at the moment of utterance, of an event or state that occurred prior to the moment of utterance. The event or state is expressed as an experience which happened at least once, without respect to a particular location in time, and which is repeatable.

term: Elicitation Frame, definition: An elicitation frame is a fixed environment that is used for discovering or testing particular words.

term: Entity Metaphor, definition: An entity metaphor is an ontological metaphor in which an abstraction is represented as a concrete physical object.

term: Evidence Relation, definition: An evidence relation is a logical relation in which a proposition(s) are intended to increase the addressee's assurance of another proposition(s).

term: Exposed Repair, definition: Exposed repair is an other-initiated repair that is not handled covertly as an embedded repair.

term: Elision, definition: Elision is the omission of sounds, syllables, or words in spoken or written discourse.

term: Environment, definition: An environment is all the parts of an utterance that directly surround a given sound.

term: Evidentiality, definition: by Teija Greed, March 2022 
Evidentiality is a linguistic category whose primary meaning is information source. In a number of languages evidential meanings are expressed through grammatical means: the speaker conveys the source of knowledge for his or her statement with special evidential markers. Some languages, for example, Tariana spoken in Amazonia, has obligatory marking of information source: with verb affixes the speaker indicates the source of his or her knowledge. Evidentiality is distinct from (epistemic) modality which concerns the speaker’s evaluation of his or her statement, for example, with regard to its certainty.
In the area of grammatical evidentiality, to decribe evidential meanings, semantic parameters, such as visual, sensory, inference, assumption, reported and quotative (Aikhenvald 2014 (2016): 9), are commonly used. Evidentiality is also studied in the context of the French médiativité (Guentchéva 1996; Guentchéva & Laudabury 2007), and especially in Turkic languages under the term indirectivity (Johanson & Utas 2000).

term: Expository Discourse, definition: Expository discourse is a discourse that explains or describes a topic.
It does not primarily present contingent events or focus on a performer of actions, but rather tends to present the following kinds of propositions:

Existential
Stative
Equative

 



Features


 


Information is logically oriented around a theme.
Third person pronoun forms are used.
Texts are not oriented around a specific agent.








Parts


 


Problem
Solution
Supporting argumentation
Evaluation of the solution






term: Elliptical Construction, definition: An elliptical construction is a construction that lacks an element that is recoverable or inferable from the context.

term: Epistemic Modality, definition: Epistemic modality is a modality that connotes how much certainty or evidence a speaker has for the proposition expressed by his or her utterance.

term: Evoked Entity, definition: An evoked entity is a referent which is given information due:

to previous mention in the text
to the prominence of the referent in the extralinguistic context


term: Expository Text, definition: Expository text is a text which explains something.

term: Embedded Repair, definition: An embedded repair is an other-initiated repair that is performed by the addressee of the questioned utterance by the substitution of the repairing item in the addressee’s own utterance.

term: Epistemic Qualification, definition: An epistemic qualification is a signal of the degree of certainty the speaker has for the proposition expressed by his or her utterance.

term: Exclamation, definition: Here are two senses for exclamation:

An exclamation, broadly defined, is any utterance made with strong emotion.
An exclamation, narrowly defined, is a sentence type that is used to express a strong emotional state. It contrasts in syntax or morphology with other sentence types which typically express statements, commands, and questions.


term: Expressive Illocutionary Point, definition: An expressive illocutionary point is an illocutionary point which communicates an attitude or emotion about the state of affairs described in the propositional content of the utterance.

term: Empathetic Deixis, definition: Empathetic deixis is the metaphorical use of deictic forms to indicate emotional or other psychological “distance” or “proximity” between a speaker and a referent.

term: Equative Case, definition: Equative case is a case that expresses likeness or identity to the referent of the noun it marks.
It can have meaning, such as:

as
like
in the capacity of


term: Exclamative, definition: An exclamative is a word or phrase which marks an exclamation.

term: Extendedness, definition: Extendedness is a type of place deixis in which the presence or absence of a component of meaning indicates that a location has length or area.

term: Emphasis Marker, definition: An emphasis marker is a word or affix that expresses a speaker's stress upon the predicate of a sentence.

term: Equative Clause, definition: An equative clause is a clause which describes a feature of its subject. It contains a subject complement and, typically, a copula.

term: Exclusive Alternative Relation, definition: An exclusive alternative relation is an alternative relation in which only one of the propositions or groups of propositions can be true or fulfilled.

term: Extension, definition: Extension is place deixis that indicates that a location has length or area.

term: Emphatic Additive Relation, definition: An emphatic additive relation is an additive relation in which the cumulative nature of the propositions in the relation is emphasized.

term: Equilibrium Schema, definition: An equilibrium schema is a balance schema that involves physical or metaphorical external and internal pressure on container-like objects.

term: Exclusive First Person Deixis, definition: Exclusive first person deixis is deixis that refers to a group not including the addressee(s).

term: External Relation, definition: An external relation is an interpropositional relation which relates the situations described in the propositions by experiential, extralinguistic reality as opposed to relating them by the solely communicative usage of propositions.

term: Emphatic Alternative Relation, definition: An emphatic alternative relation is an alternative relation in which the existence of different possibilities is stressed.

term: Equivalent, definition: An equivalent is a term of social deixis that expresses equality of status.

term: Exemplification Relation, definition: An exemplification relation is a specification relation in which a specification is achieved by providing an instance.

term: External Relative Clause, definition: An external relative clause is a relative clause whose head noun phrase is outside the relative clause.

term: Emphatic Pronoun, definition: An emphatic pronoun is a personal pronoun that is used to emphasize its referent.

term: Ergative Case, definition: Ergative case is the case of nouns in ergative-absolutive languages that would generally be the subjects of transitive verbs in the translation equivalents of nominative-accusative languages such as English.

term: Existential Clause, definition: An existential clause is a clause, having a distinctive grammatical structure, which expresses the real or imagined existence of an entity.

term: Extraposition, definition: Extrapostion is the process or result of moving an element from its normal place to a place at the end or near to the end of a sentence.

term: Enablement Relation, definition: An enablement relation is an interpropositional relation in which a proposition(s) supports a speaker's directive by improving the addressee’s ability to fulfill it or take advantage of it.

term: Essive Case, definition: Essive case is a case that expresses the temporary state of the referent specified by a noun.
The case has the meaning of:

while
in the capacity of


term: Factitive As A Semantic Role, definition: Factitive is the semantic role of an referent that results from the action or state identified by a verb.

term: Finite Verb, definition: A finite verb is a verb form that

occurs in an independent clause, and
is fully inflected according to the inflectional categories marked on verbs in the language.


term: Force As A Semantic Role, definition: Force is the semantic role of an entity that instigates an action, but not consciously or voluntarily.

term: Free Variation, definition: Free variation is the interchangeable relationship between two phones, in which the phones may substitute for one another in the same environment without causing a change in meaning.

term: Failure Of Fit, definition: Failure of fit is a lack of correspondence between the state of affairs

described by the propositional content of an illocutionary act, and
in the world.


term: First Part, definition: A first part is the first utterance in an adjacency pair.

term: Force Schema, definition: A force schema is an image schema that involves physical or metaphorical causal interaction. It includes the following elements:

A source and target of the force
A direction and intensity of the force
A path of motion of the source and/or target
A sequence of causation


term: Function Word, definition: A function word is a word which have no lexical meaning, and whose sole function is to express grammatical relationships.
 
 



Also known as:

grammatical word, empty word, functor





term: Familiarity, definition: Familiarity is a kind of social deixis that expresses a high degree of solidarity between the speaker and addressee.

term: First Person Deixis, definition: First person deixis is deictic reference that refers to

the speaker, or
both the speaker and referents grouped with the speaker.


term: Formal Language, definition: Formal language is language use characterized by:

speech before a passive audience
the assumption of a role by the speaker
the use of artificial means of communication such as writing or electronics, and
the use of a “high” dialect or language in preference to a “low” one.


term: Fusional Language, definition: A fusional language is a language in which one form of a morpheme can simultaneously encode several meanings.

term: Feminine Gender, definition: Feminine gender is a grammatical gender that

marks nouns that have human or animal female referents, and
often marks nouns that have referents that do not carry distinctions of sex.


term: Fit, definition: Fit is a correspondence, or lack of correspondence, between the state of affairs described by the propositional content of an illocutionary act and the state of affairs in the world.

term: Formality, definition: Formality is a kind of social deixis that expresses the setting or social activity in which language use takes place.

term: Future Perfect Tense, definition: Future perfect tense is an absolute-relative tense that refers to a time located before a contextually determined temporal reference point that must be located in the future relative to the moment of utterance.

term: Field Distinction, definition: A field distinction is a type of place deixis that expresses an opposition between locations in visual range and those not in visual range.

term: Fixed Collocation, definition: A fixed collocation is a phrase or construction

which is decompositional, and
whose constituents recurrently combine with each other.

 



Features


 


Constituents repeatedly co-occur with each other.
Constituents are bound specifically to each other.
Constituents do not co-occur with other lexical units freely. Only a few, if any, words may be substituted for the co-occurring lexical units.
Correct usage is not predictable on the basis of the known function or meaning of the co-occurring lexical units.






term: Fortis Consonant, definition: A fortis consonant is a “strong” consonant produced by increased tension in the vocal apparatus. These strong consonants tend to be long, voiceless, aspirated, and high.
 

term: Future Tense, definition: Future tense is an absolute tense that refers to a time after the moment of utterance.

term: Field Notebook, definition: A field notebook is a permanent record of your language data.
 



Features


 


Sturdy and bound
Readily available as part of the regular stock in a local bookstore






term: Fixed Lexical Collocation, definition: A fixed lexical collocation is a collocation of two or more co-occurring lexemes in an unchanging syntactic and semantic relationship.

term: Fossilized Term, definition: A fossilized term is a word or root that occurs only as an archaic expression.

term: Future-In-Future Tense, definition: Future-in-future tense is an absolute-relative tense that refers to a time located in the future, relative to a temporal reference point that itself is located in the future relative to the moment of utterance.

term: Figurative Sense, definition: A figurative sense is a meaning that is derived from a primary sense by analogy (for example, personification), association (for example, metonymy), or similarity (for example, metaphor and simile).

term: Flouting Implicature, definition: A flouting implicature is a conversational implicature based on an addressee's assumption that the speaker is deliberately breaking (flouting) a conversational maxim while still being cooperative.

term: Free Morpheme, definition: A free morpheme is a grammatical unit that can occur by itself. However, other morphemes such as affixes can be attached to it.

term: Future-In-Past Tense, definition: Future-in-past tense is an absolute-relative tense that refers to a time located in the future, relative to a contextually determined temporal reference point that itself must be located in the past relative to the moment of utterance.

term: Final Clause, definition: A final clause is the last clause in a clause chain. It is distinguished from medial clauses by a difference in verb morphology.

term: Focus, definition: Focus is a term that refers to information, in a sentence, that

is new
is of high communicative interest
is marked by stress
typically occurs late in the sentence, and
complements the presupposed information typically presented early in the sentence.


term: Free Translation, definition: A free translation is a translation that reproduces the general meaning of the original text.
It may or may not closely follow the form or organization of the original.

term: Future-Perfect-In-Past Tense, definition: Future-perfect-in-past tense is an absolute-relative tense that involves three points in time in the past. The tense refers to a time that is in the future, relative to another point in the past, but is in the past relative to a point in its future. All these points in time are in the past relative to the moment of utterance.

term: Finite Clause, definition: A finite clause is a clause with a finite verb.

term: Gap, definition: A gap is conversational silence at the end of a turn in a situation in which:

no next speaker has been selected by the previous one
no participant has selected himself or herself as the next speaker, and
the silence is too short to constitute a lapse.


term: Genitive Case, definition: Genitive case is a case in which the referent of the marked noun is the possessor of the referent of another noun.

term: Gloss, definition: A gloss is a summary of the meaning of a morpheme or word, suitable for use in interlinear text displays.

term: Grammatical Gender, definition: Grammatical gender is a noun class system, composed of two or three classes, whose nouns that have human male and female referents tend to be in separate classes. Other nouns that are classified in the same way in the language may not be classed by any correlation with natural sex distinctions.

term: Generalized Implicature, definition: A generalized implicature is a conversational implicature that is inferable without reference to a special context.

term: Genre, definition: Genre is a category used to classify discourse and literary works, usually by form, technique, or content.

term: Glottal Stop, definition: A glottal stop is a speech sound articulated by a momentary, complete closing of the glottis in the back of the throat. Glottal stops occur in many languages and usually pattern as consonants.

term: Grammatical Relation, definition: A grammatical relation is a role of a noun phrase or complement clause that determines syntactic behaviors such as the following:

Word position in a clause
Verb agreement
Participation and behavior in such operations as passivization


term: Generative Phonology, definition: Generative phonology is a component of generative grammar that assigns the correct phonetic representations to utterances in such a way as to reflect a native speaker’s internalized grammar.

term: Gestural Usage, definition: Gestural usage is the use of a deictic expression in such a way that a physical monitoring of the speech situation is necessary for interpretation of the expression.

term: Glottis, definition: The glottis is the space between the vocal folds.

term: Grammatical Tone, definition: Grammatical tone is the distinctive pitch level which marks contrasts in grammatical features such as tense, aspect, and case.

term: Generic Term, definition: A generic term is a noun or noun phrase that refers to:

a whole class
any member of a class as a representative of its class


term: Given Information, definition: Given information is information that is assumed by the speaker to be known to, assumed by, or inferable by the addressee at the time of the speaker's utterance, because it is:

common knowledge
part of the extralinguistic context
previously established in the discourse


term: Goal As A Semantic Role, definition: Goal is the semantic role of the:

place to which something moves
thing toward which an action is directed


term: Grounding, definition: Grounding refers to establishing the time, location or actuality of a situation according to some reference point.

term: Generic-Specific Lexical Relation, definition: A generic-specific lexical relation is a hierarchical association between a lexical unit with a broader, more general meaning and other lexical units with a narrower, more precise meaning.

term: Given Versus New Information, definition: Given versus new information is a distinction between information that is assumed or supplied by the speaker and that which is presented for the first time.

term: Grammatical Category, definition: A grammatical category is a set of syntactic features that:

express meanings from the same conceptual domain
occur in contrast to each other
are typically expressed in the same fashion


term: Habitual Aspect, definition: Habitual aspect is an imperfective aspect that expresses the occurrence of an event or state as characteristic of a period of time.

term: Hesternal Past Tense, definition: Hesternal past tense is a past tense that refers to a time that is located somewhere in the span beginning with the period defined culturally as "yesterday" and extends back through some period that is considered nonremote.

term: Homophone, definition: A homophone is a

group of two or more letters representing the same speech sound, or
homonym (sense 1).


term: Hortatory Text, definition: Hortatory text is a text which represents an attempt on the part of the speaker to get the addressee to do something or to act in a certain way.

term: Head, definition: A head is a constituent of an endocentric construction that, if standing alone, could perform the syntactic function of the whole construction.
It may govern the:

agreement of grammatical categories, such as person and number, or
occurrence of other constituents.


term: Hierarchical Lexical Relation, definition: A hierarchical lexical relation is an association between lexical units that have a system of arrangement into levels of increasing:

size 
complexity

A hierarchical set has the structure of a scale.

term: Homophora, definition: Homophora is reference that depends on cultural knowledge or other general knowledge, rather than on specific features of a particular context.

term: Host, definition: A host is the preceding or following word to which a clitic is phonologically joined.

term: Head Of A Phrase, definition: The head of a phrase is the element that determines the syntactic function of the whole phrase.

term: Hodiernal Future Tense, definition: Hodiernal future tense is a future tense that refers to a time that is located after the moment of utterance within the span culturally defined as "today."

term: Honorific, definition: An honorific is a grammatical form, typically a word or affix, that is socially deictic It expresses, as at least part of its meaning, the relative social status of the speaker with .

the addressee
a bystander, or
some other referent.


term: Human Class, definition: A human class is a noun class that has human referents.

term: Headword, definition: A headword is the form which introduces an entry in a printed dictionary. It is the form by which a dictionary is sorted.
Depending upon the language, the headword for an entry may be the:

base form
citation form


term: Hodiernal Past Tense, definition: Hodiernal past tense is a past tense that refers to a time as located before the moment of utterance within the span culturally defined as "today."

term: Horizontal Deixis, definition: Horizontal deixis is a type of place deixis that has no component of meaning indicating location upward or downward, in a system of place deictic expressions that make such distinctions of verticality.

term: Hyperbole, definition: Hyperbole is deliberate exaggeration for emotional effect. The addressee is not expected to have a literal understanding of the expression.

term: Hedged Performative, definition: A hedged performative is an indirect illocution whose illocutionary force is expressed directly by a performative verb but is given an additional illocutionary force by some device, such as modalization or subordination.

term: Homograph, definition: A homograph is word that has the same spelling as another. Homographs differ from each other in:

meaning
origin, and
sometimes pronunciation.


term: Hortatory Discourse, definition: Hortatory discourse is a discourse that is an attempt to persuade the addressee to fulfill commands that are given in the discourse.

term: Hypothetical Mood, definition: Hypothetical mood is an epistemic mood that signals that the speaker evaluates a proposition as counterfactual, but otherwise possible.

term: Hesitation Pause, definition: A hesitation pause is conversational silence that occurs within a turn.

term: Homonym, definition: Here are three senses of homonym.

A word that has the same pronunciation as another. Homonyms differ from each other in:​

meaning
origin
usually spelling


Loosely, a homograph
Either of two people with the same name
	




term: Identity Of Illocutionary Forces, definition: Identity of illocutionary forces is a relationship between two illocutionary forces such that when they are employed with the same propositional content, they have the same conditions for nondefective performance. The two forces thus serve the same purpose and have the same components of illocutionary force.

term: Immediate Imperative Mood, definition: Immediate imperative mood is an imperative mood that signals that the command or request is to be carried out right away.

term: Indirect Object, definition: An indirect object is a grammatical relation that is one means of expressing the semantic role of goal and other similar roles.
It is proposed for languages in which the role is distinct from the direct object and the oblique object on the basis of multiple independent syntactic or morphological criteria, such as the following:

Having a particular case marking, commonly dative
Governing an agreement affix on the verb, such as person or number
Being distinct from oblique relations in that it may be relativized


term: Instrumental Case, definition: Instrumental case is a case indicating that the referent of the noun it marks is the means of the accomplishment of the action expressed by the clause.

term: Ideophone, definition: An ideophone is a member of a set of words that

are phonologically distinguishable from other words in a language
are often onomatopoeic, and
form one or more syntactic classes or subclasses, most typically adverbial.


term: Immediate Past Tense, definition: Immediate past tense is past tense that refers to a time considered very recent in relation to the moment of utterance.

term: Indirect Speech, definition: Indirect speech is reported speech that is presented with grammatical modifications, rather than as it might have been uttered by the original speaker. 

term: Intended Perlocutionary Effect, definition: An intended perlocutionary effect is what a speaker intends an utterance to achieve in an addressee

term: Idiom, definition: An idiom is a multiword construction that

is a semantic unit whose meaning cannot be deduced from the meanings of its constituents, and
has a non-productive syntactic structure.


term: Imperative Mood, definition: Imperative mood is mood that signals directive modality, especially in commands. Its use may be extended to signal permission.

term: Individual-Group Lexical Relation, definition: An individual-group lexical relation is an association between two lexical units in which one lexical unit is a collective term of the other.

term: Intensifier, definition: An intensifier heightens or lowers the intensity of meaning of an item.

term: Illative Case, definition: Illative case is a case that expresses motion into or direction toward the referent of the noun it marks.

term: Imperfective Aspect, definition: Imperfective aspect is an aspect that expresses an event or state, with respect to its internal structure, instead of expressing it as a simple whole.

term: Inessive Case, definition: Inessive case is a case that expresses a location within the referent of the noun it marks.

term: Interjection, definition: An interjection is a form, typically brief, such as one syllable or word, which is used most often as an exclamation or part of an exclamation.
An interjection:

typically expresses an emotional reaction, often with respect to an accompanying sentence
is not syntactically related to other accompanying expressions
may include a combination of sounds not otherwise found in the language


term: Illocutionary Act, definition: An illocutionary act is a complete speech act, made in a typical utterance, that consists of

the delivery of the propositional content of the utterance (including references and a predicate), and
a particular illocutionary force, whereby the speaker
	
asserts
suggests
demands
promises, or
vows.




term: Impermissible Mixed Metaphors, definition: Impermissible mixed metaphors are metaphors that conflict because they serve different purposes.

term: Inferable Entity, definition: An inferable entity is a referent that may be inferred by the addressee from other information that has already been given.

term: Internal Relation, definition: An internal relation is an interpropositional relation that relates the situations described in the propositions by their communicative usage as opposed to relating the situations described by the propositions.

term: Illocutionary Conditional, definition: An illocutionary conditional is a complex illocutionary act that consists of

an illocutionary act, and
a stated condition for the performance of that act.


term: Impersonal Verb, definition: An impersonal verb is a verb that

occurs only in third person singular forms
has no specified agent, and
has a dummy subject or no subject.


term: Inferior Status, definition: Inferior status is social deixis that encodes a low degree of status.

term: Internal Relative Clause, definition: An internal relative clause is a relative clause whose head noun phrase occurs within the relative clause itself.

term: Illocutionary Connective, definition: An illocutionary connective is a connective that is used to join two or more illocutionary acts in one utterance.

term: Implicational Scale, definition: An implicational scale is a set of lexical items that are

of the same constituent category, and
ordered in terms of their informativeness.

Any sentence including one item of the set entails all of the propositions expressed by similar sentences containing less informative items. In addition, in keeping with the quantity maxim, the use of an item in the scale creates scalar implicatures that disallow the propositions expressed by similar sentences that contain more informative items.

term: Infield Distinction, definition: An infield distinction is a distinction in place deixis that indicates that a location is in visual range.

term: Interpretation Relation, definition: An interpretation relation is an interpropositional relation in which some proposition(s) relate the content of some other proposition(s) to a different framework of ideas, a framework other than the speaker's value judgments. 

term: Illocutionary Consistency, definition: Illocutionary consistency is a property of a set of illocutionary acts such that it is possible, in at least one context of utterance, for the speaker to be committed to all the acts simultaneously.

term: Implicature, definition: An implicature is anything that is inferred from an utterance but that is not a condition for the truth of the utterance.

term: Infinitive, definition: An infinitive is the base form of a verb. It is unmarked for inflectional categories such as the following:

Aspect
Modality
Number
Person
Tense


term: Interpropositional Relation, definition: An interpropositional relation is an explicit or inferred coherence relation between propositions or groups of propositions that are typically expressed by clauses or larger portions of text.
Interpropositional relations can account for the coherence between portions of text.

term: Illocutionary Denegation, definition: An illocutionary denegation is an illocutionary act that is made complex by the negation of its illocutionary force. It expresses that the speaker is not performing a particular illocutionary act.

term: Imprecative Mood, definition: Imprecative mood is a volitive mood that signals the speaker's wish that an unfavorable proposition will come about.

term: Infix, definition: An infix is an affix that is inserted within a root or stem.

term: Interrogative Mood, definition: An interrogative mood is an epistemic mood that signals that the speaker wishes to elicit information concerning the content of his or her utterance from the addressee.

term: Illocutionary Force, definition: Illocutionary force is the combination of the

illocutionary point of an utterance, and
particular presuppositions and attitudes that must accompany that point, including the
	
strength of the illocutionary point
preparatory conditions
propositional content conditions
mode of achievement
sincerity conditions, and
strength of sincerity conditions.




term: Inalienable Noun, definition: An inalienable noun is a noun that

refers to something viewed as permanently and necessarily possessed, and
is thus obligatorily expressed as possessed.

It may require a distinguishing possessive form.

term: Infixation, definition: Infixation is a morphological process whereby a bound morpheme attaches within a root or stem.
The kind of affix involved in this process is called an infix.

term: Interrogative Pro-Form, definition: An interrogative pro-form is a pro-form that is used in questions to stand for the item questioned.

term: Illocutionary Force Indicating Device, definition: An illocutionary force indicating device is any linguistic element that indicates or delimits the illocutionary force of an utterance.

term: Inanimate Class, definition: An inanimate class is a category of nouns that do not have human or animal referents.

term: Inflection, definition: Inflection is variation in the form of a word, typically by means of an affix, that expresses a grammatical contrast which is obligatory for the stem’s word class in some given grammatical context.

term: Intimate Social Deixis, definition: Intimate social deixis is deixis that expresses a very high degree of solidarity between the speaker and the addressee.

term: Illocutionary Inconsistency, definition: Illocutionary inconsistency is a property of a set of illocutionary acts such that it is not possible, in any context of utterance, for the speaker to be committed to all the acts simultaneously.

term: Inchoative Aspect, definition: Inchoative aspect is an aspect that expresses the beginning of an event or state.

term: Inflectional Affix, definition: An inflectional affix is an affix that:

expresses a grammatical contrast that is obligatory for its stem's word class in some given grammatical context
does not change the word class of its stem
is typically located farther from its root than a derivational affix
produces a predictable, nonidiosyncratic change of meaning.


term: Intonation, definition: Intonation is the system of levels (rising and falling) and variations in pitch sequences within speech.

term: Illocutionary Point, definition: An illocutionary point is the basic purpose of a speaker in making an utterance.
It is a component of illocutionary force.

term: Inclusive Alternative Relation, definition: An inclusive alternative relation is an alternative relation in which more than one of the propositions may be true or fulfilled.

term: Inflectional Category, definition: An inflectional category is a class of affixes that share a common grammatical feature.

term: Intransitivity, definition: Intransitivity is a term that describes a verb or clause that is unable to take a direct object.

term: Illocutionary Verb, definition: An illocutionary verb is a verb that, as part of its meaning, expresses

at least one illocutionary force, or
a quality of some component of illocutionary force.


term: Inclusive First Person Deixis, definition: Inclusive first person deixis is deixis that refers to a group including the addressee(s).

term: Informal Language, definition: Informal language is language use characterized by:

spontaneous speech in situations that may be described as natural or "real-life," and
the use of a "low” dialect or language in preference to a “high” one.


term: Irony, definition: Irony is a trope in which an expression is used in such a fashion as to convey the opposite meaning of what is expressed.

term: Illustrative Sentence, definition: An illustrative sentence is an example that clarifies the usage of a particular sense of a lexeme.

term: Indefinite Concessive Relation, definition: An indefinite concessive relation is a concession relation in which the clause that expresses the concession contains a form, such as the following, that expresses a range:

An indefinite pro-form
An expression with a meaning similar to “no matter”


term: Informativeness Principle, definition: The informativeness principle is an implicature in which the addressee is licensed to apply his or her knowledge of the world to infer an implicature that is informationally stronger than the actual utterance.
This principle, in addition to the cooperative principle and conversational maxims, enables the addressee to resolve apparent conflicts with the quantity maxim.

term: Irrealis Modality, definition: Irrealis modality is a modality that connotes that the proposition with which it is associated is nonactual or nonfactual.

term: Image Schema, definition: An image schema is a mental pattern that

recurrently provides structured understanding of various experiences, and
is available for use in metaphor as a source domain to provide an understanding of yet other experiences.


term: Indefinite Pronoun, definition: An indefinite pronoun is a pronoun that belongs to a class whose members indicate indefinite reference.

term: Initiative Time Latency, definition: An initiative time latency is the time between the end of a participant's turn and the resumption of his or her speakership in the absence of a response from any other participant.

term: Irregular Verb, definition: An irregular verb is a verb which does not conform to an expected inflectional pattern.

term: Immediacy, definition: Immediacy is a distinction in place deixis that indicates location at a distance intermediate between locations considered proximal and distal.

term: Indefiniteness, definition: Indefiniteness is a kind of definiteness indicating that the referent(s) of an expression are not presumed to be identifiable.
The referent is not identifiable because of a lack of shared knowledge or situation, including no previous mention of the referent.

term: Insertion Sequence, definition: An insertion sequence is a sequence of turns that intervenes between the first and second parts of an adjacency pair.

term: Isolating Language, definition: An isolating language is a language in which almost every word consists of a single morpheme.

term: Immediate Constituent, definition: An immediate constituent is any one of the largest grammatical units that constitute a construction. Immediate constituents are often further reducible.

term: Indirect Illocution, definition: Indirect illocution is an illocutionary act in which the speaker expresses another illocutionary force other than that literally expressed in the utterance, by relying on:

shared background knowledge
principles of conversation, such as the cooperative principle
convention
the ability of the addressee to make inferences


term: Instrument As A Semantic Role, definition: Instrument is the semantic role of an inanimate thing that an agent uses to implement an event. It is the stimulus or immediate physical cause of an event.

term: Iterative Aspect, definition: Iterative aspect is an aspect that expresses the repetition of an event or state.

term: Judgment Modality, definition: Judgment modality is an epistemic modality that connotes the speaker's

strength of inference, or
degree of confidence

in the reality of the proposition expressed by his or her utterance.

term: Jussive Mood, definition: Jussive mood is a directive mood that signals a speaker's command, permission, or agreement that the proposition expressed by his or her utterance be brought about.

term: Justification Relation, definition: A justification relation is an interpropositional relation in which one or more propositions provide the basis or right of the speaker to perform the illocutionary act expressed in another proposition.

term: Kinetic Distinction, definition: Kinetic distinction is a distinction in place deixis that indicates direction of movement with respect to the speaker or other deictic center.

term: Labialization, definition: Labialization is a way of pronouncing a sound or sounds (consonants and vowels by using one or both lips.

term: Lexical Database, definition: A lexical database is an organized description of the lexemes of a language.

term: Lexical Relation With A Set Of Pairs Structure, definition: A lexical relation with a set of pairs structure is a pattern of association between lexical units which is characterized by a binary contrast, correlation, or correspondence between two sense sets.

term: Link Schema, definition: A link schema is an image schema that consists of two or more entities, connected physically or metaphorically, and the bond between them.

term: Language Associate, definition: A language associate is a person who

teaches you how to speak a language
provides you with language data, and
helps you do linguistic research.

 



Characteristics


 

Language associates should be



 


easy to work with
interested in the work
available to work on a regular basis
a fluent speaker of the language, and
a mother tongue speaker, if possible.






term: Lexical Form, definition: A lexical form is an abstract unit representing a set of wordforms differing only in inflection and not in core meaning.
It is a component part of a lexical unit.

term: Lexical Relation With A Simple Set Structure, definition: A lexical relation with a simple set structure is a pattern of association between lexical units that share one or more semantic components.

term: Literal Meaning In A Lexical Database, definition: The literal meaning is used to give the glosses of the individual components of a multi-morpheme expression, such as a compound or an idiom, where the meaning of the whole is different from the sum of its parts.

term: Lapse, definition: A lapse is a relatively long silence between turns that is due to none of the participants taking a turn.

term: Lexical Phonology, definition: Lexical phonology is an approach to phonology that accounts for the interactions of morphology and phonology in the word building process.
The lexicon plays a central, productive role in the theory. It consists of ordered levels, which are the domain for certain phonological or morphological processes.

term: Lexical Relation With A Tree Structure, definition: A lexical relation with a tree structure is a pattern of association that is characterized by a set of lexical units which both have an inclusion relationship with and are dominated by one lexical unit. These sets may form a taxonomy or a meronymy.

term: Literal Translation, definition: A literal translation is a translation that follows closely the form of the source language.

term: Lative Case, definition: Lative case is a case that expresses motion

up to the location of, or
as far as the referent of the noun it marks.


term: Lexical Relation, definition: A lexical relation is a culturally recognized pattern of association that exists between lexical units in a language.

term: Lexical Tone, definition: Lexical tone is the distinctive pitch level carried by the syllable of a word which is an essential feature of the meaning of that word.

term: Litotes, definition: Litotes is the use of a negated antonym to make an understatement or to emphatically affirm the positive.

term: Length, definition: Length is the amount of time it takes to produce a sound.

term: Lexical Relation Elicitation Frame, definition: A lexical relation elicitation frame is a set of words of a particular lexical relation that is an example for eliciting more lexical relations of the same type for other words.

term: Lexical Unit, definition: A lexical unit is a form-meaning composite that represents a

lexical form, and
single meaning of a lexeme.


term: Locative As A Semantic Role, definition: Locative is a semantic role which identifies the location or spatial orientation of a state or action.
A locative semantic role does not imply motion to, from, or across the location.

term: Lenis Consonant, definition: A lenis consonant is a “weak” consonant produced by the lack of tension in the vocal apparatus. These weak consonants tend to be short, weakly voiced or voiceless, aspirated, low, and the following vowel tends to be lengthened.

term: Lexical Relation Set, definition: A lexical relation set is a grouping of senses that are lexically related to each other.

term: Lexical Verb, definition: A lexical verb is a member of the open class of verbs which form the primary verb vocabulary of a language.

term: Locative Case, definition: Locative case is a case that expresses location at the referent of the noun it marks.

term: Lexeme, definition: A lexeme is the minimal unit of language which

has a semantic interpretation and
embodies a distinct cultural concept.

It is made up of one or more form-meaning composites called lexical units.

term: Lexical Relation With A Scale Structure, definition: A lexical relation with a scale structure is a pattern of association between lexical units in a fixed order or progression. They represent successive values of some variable property.

term: Lexicon, definition: A lexicon is the knowledge that a native speaker has about a language. This includes information about

the form and meanings of words and phrases
lexical categorization
the appropriate usage of words and phrases
relationships between words and phrases, and
categories of words and phrases.

Phonological and grammatical rules are not considered part of the lexicon.

term: Logical Relation, definition: A logical relation is an interpropositional relation in which a proposition is related to another, in reasoning, as

a premise to a conclusion, or
an antecedent to a consequent.


term: Lexical Category, definition: A lexical category is a syntactic category for elements that are part of the lexicon of a language. These elements are at the word level.

term: Main Clause, definition: A main clause is a clause that

may stand alone as a complete sentence, and
expresses the focal predication when occurring in a complex sentence.


term: Meaning, definition: Meaning is a notion in semantics classically defined as having two components:

Reference, anything in the referential realm denoted by a word or expression, and
Sense, the system of paradigmatic and syntagmatic relationships between a lexical unit and other lexical units in a language.


term: Middle Voice, definition: Middle voice is a voice that indicates that the subject is the actor and acts:

upon himself or herself reflexively
for his or her own benefit.

In the case of plural subjects, the actors may, perhaps, act upon each other.

term: Morpheme, definition: A morpheme is the smallest meaningful unit in the grammar of a language.

term: Major Entry In A Lexical Database, definition: A major entry is a unit in a lexical database representing a lexeme with its phonological, semantic, grammatical, and anthropological information (where lexically relevant and available).
Insert the following types of lexemes as major entries:

Morphemes
Letters of the alphabet
Loan words or phrases
Proper names


term: Meaning And Pragmatic Function, definition: Meaning and pragmatic function is a general heading under which terminology relating to the various areas of study of language use and interpretation is collected. These areas are variously categorized as eithersemantic or pragmatic.

term: Minimal Pair, definition: A minimal pair is two words that differ in only one sound.

term: Morpheme Type, definition: A morpheme type is a category based upon how a morpheme combines with other morphemes to form a word.

term: Manner As A Semantic Role, definition: Manner is a semantic role that notes how the action, experience, or process of an event is carried out.

term: Means-Purpose Relation, definition: A means-purpose relation is a causal relation in which:

one proposition expresses a state or activity employed so as to bring about the state or event expressed by the other proposition
the achievement or nonachievement of the desired state or event is not expressed


term: Minor Entry In A Lexical Database, definition: A minor entry is a unit in the lexical database representing a lexeme that is an irregular variant of a major entry lexeme. It contains minimal phonological, semantic, and grammatical information about the variant.
Insert the following types of lexemes as minor entries:

Irregularly inflected forms
Irregular phonological variants


term: Morphological Process, definition: A morphological process is a means of changing a stem to adjust its meaning to fit its syntactic and communicational context.

term: Manner Implicature, definition: A manner implicature is a conversational implicature based on an addressee's assumption that the speaker is either observing or flouting the conversational maxim of manner.
If the speaker is assumed to be observing the maxim, then the addressee makes a standard implicature. If the speaker is assumed to be flouting the maxim, then the addressee makes a more nonstandard type of implicature.

term: Means-Result Relation, definition: A means-result relation is a causal relation in which:

one proposition expresses a state or activity employed so as to bring about the state or event expressed by the other proposition
the achievement or nonachievement of the desired state or event is expressed


term: Misplacement Marker, definition: A misplacement marker is a device used in a turn of conversation to indicate that the turn is in some way out of place.

term: Morphological Typology, definition: Morphological typology is the categorization of a language according to the extent to which words in the language are clearly divisible into individual morphemes.

term: Manner Of Articulation, definition: Manner of articulation is the type of closure made by the articulators and the degree of the obstruction of the airstream by those articulators.

term: Measure As A Semantic Role, definition: Measure is a semantic role which notes the quantification of an event.

term: Mixed Metaphors, definition: Mixed metaphors are different metaphors occurring in the same utterance, especially the same sentence, that are used to express the same concept.
Mixed metaphors often, but not always, result in a conflict of concepts.

term: Morphology, definition: Morphology is the study of the internal structure of words.

term: Manner Of Discourse, definition: A manner of discourse is an identifiable style of speech that is suitable for a particular type of:

addressee
social setting
subject matter


term: Medial Clause, definition: A medial clause is any clause in a clause chain which:

is not the final clause, and
is distinguishable from the final clause by a difference in verb morphology


term: Mode Of Achievement, definition: A mode of achievement is the means employed by a speaker to accomplish the illocutionary point of an utterance.

term: Morphophonemic Rule, definition: A morphophonemic rule has the form of a phonological rule, but is restricted to a particular morphological environment.

term: Marker, definition: A marker is a lexical item that signals a morphosyntactic operation.

term: Mediopassive Voice, definition: Mediopassive voice is a passive voice in which the:

verb has stative meaning, and
actor is not expressed


term: Moderate Epistemic Qualification, definition: A moderate epistemic qualification is an epistemic qualification that signals a middle degree of certainty.

term: Morphophonemics, definition: Morphophonemics is the study of phonemic differences between allomorphs of the same morpheme; a description of variations in a particular language.

term: Marking Clause, definition: A marking clause is a clause, in a language with the grammatical category of switch reference, that contains an indication as to whether or not one of its arguments is coreferential with an argument of a reference clause.
The indication is often provided by a verbal affix. The argument is typically the subject.

term: Meiosis, definition: Meiosis is the minimization of the importance of a referent by the use of an expression that is disproportionate to it.

term: Modification, definition: Modification is a morphological process which produces an alteration within a root or stem.

term: Morphosyntactic Operation, definition: A morphosyntactic operation is an ordered, dynamic relation between one linguistic form and another.

term: Masculine Gender, definition: Masculine gender is a grammatical gender that:

marks nouns having human or animal male referents
often marks nouns having referents that do not have distinctions of sex


term: Metaphor, definition: Here are two senses of metaphor:

A metaphor is the expression of an understanding of one concept in terms of another concept, where there is some similarity or correlation between the two.
A metaphor is the understanding itself of one concept in terms of another.


term: Modifier, definition: A modifier is a constituent, in an endocentric construction, that imparts information relating to the head of the construction.

term: Motivation Relation, definition: An interpropositional relation in which the speaker expresses a proposition(s) to increase the addressee's willingness to accept the directive communicated in another proposition.

term: Mass Noun, definition: A mass noun is a noun whose referents are not thought of as separate entities.
It may have distinguishing features such as the following:

The inability to take a plural form
Cooccurrence with some determiners (such as some and much), but not others (such as the English many)

 

term: Metaphorical Entailment, definition: A metaphorical entailment is the imparting of a characteristic of the source domain (the metaphorical image) to the target domain (the concept receiving metaphorical treatment) by logical means.

term: Mood And Modality, definition: Mood is one of a set of distinctive forms that are used to signal modality.
Modality is a facet of illocutionary force, signaled by grammatical devices (that is, moods), that expresses:

the illocutionary point or general intent of a speaker
a speaker’s degree of commitment to the expressed proposition's believability, obligatoriness, desirability, or reality


term: Move, definition: A move is a stretch of talk that forms a unit. It has a functional relation to the conversation of which it is a part.

term: Matrix, definition: A matrix is an arrangement of items into labeled rows and columns within a table.
It shows the relationship between two categories of features that are relevant to the items in the matrix. The row headings represent features belonging to one category. The column headings represent features belonging to another category.
Each column or row contains items having the feature described in the heading. Each cell in the matrix represents an item characterized by the features in the corresponding column and row.

term: Metonymy, definition: Here are two senses for metonymy:

Metonymy is, broadly defined, a trope in which one entity is used to stand for another associated entity.
Metonymy is, more specifically, a replacive relationship that is the basis for a number of conventional metonymic expressions occurring in ordinary language.


term: Morph, definition: A morph is the phonetic realization of a morpheme.

term: Multiplicative Numeral, definition: A multiplicative numeral is a numeral that expresses how many fold or how many times.

term: Matrix Sentence, definition: A matrix sentence is a sentence in which a clause has been embedded as a constituent.
The clause may or may not be an immediate constituent, but it must be embedded by means other than coordination.

term: Metrical Phonology, definition: Metrical phonology is a phonological theory concerned with organizing segments into groups of relative prominence. Segments are organized into syllables, syllables into metrical feet, feet into phonological words, and words into larger units.
This organization is represented formally by metrical trees and grids.
 

term: Narrative Discourse, definition: A narrative discourse is a discourse that is an account of events, usually in the past, that employs verbs of speech, motion, and action to describe a series of events that are contingent one on another, and that typically focuses on one or more performers of actions.

term: New Information, definition: New information is information that is assumed by the speaker not

to be known to or assumed by the addressee, or
previously established in the discourse.


term: Nondefective Illocutionary Act, definition: A nondefective illocutionary act is an illocutionary act for which all the presuppositions of the propositional content conditions, preparatory conditions, and sincerity conditions are satisfied.

term: Nonvisual Evidential, definition: A nonvisual evidential is a sensory evidential that signals that the speaker's evidence for the truth of his or her statement is derived from a sense other than sight.

term: Narrative Text, definition: A narrative text is an account of events.

term: New Metaphor, definition: A new metaphor is a metaphor that is not already part of the conceptual system of a culture as reflected in its language.

term: Nonextendedness, definition: Nonextendedness is place deixis that has a component of meaning indicating that the location does not have length or area.

term: Not-Yet Tense, definition: Not-yet tense is an absolute tense that refers to times at and before the moment of utterance in asserting the present and past nonoccurrence of an event or state. It tends to imply that the event or state is expected to occur in the future.
This tense corresponds to the meaning of the English not yet.

term: Nasalization, definition: Nasalization is a way of pronouncing sounds characterized by resonance produced through the nose.

term: Newsmark, definition: A newsmark is a move that treats a previous utterance as news and encourages further talk about it.

term: Nonfinite Clause, definition: A nonfinite clause is a clause with a nonfinite verb.

term: Notional, definition: A notional X is an X that is thought of informally or in extralinguistic terms.

term: Nasalized Vowel, definition: A nasalized vowel is a vowel that is nasalized by a process in which the soft palate is lowered, opening the velum, which allows air to go through both the nasal and oral cavities.

term: Next Turn Repair Initiator, definition: A next turn repair initiator is an utterance, used in the turn after a repairable item, that prompts for a third turn repair in the next turn.

term: Nonfinite Verb, definition: A nonfinite verb is a verb that is not fully inflected for categories that are marked inflectionally in a language, such as the following:

Tense
Aspect
Modality
Number
Person


term: Noun, definition: A noun is a member of a syntactic class

that includes words which refer to people, places, things, ideas, or concepts
whose members may act as any of the following: subjects of the verb, objects of the verb, indirect object of the verb, or object of a preposition (or postposition), and
most of whose members have inherently determined grammatical gender (in languages which inflect for gender).


term: Natural Class, definition: A natural class is a set of sounds that have certain phonetic features in common.
All the members of a natural class are affected in the same way in the same environment. Similarly, all members of a natural class have the same effect on other sounds that occur in their environment.
For a group of sounds to constitute a natural class,

they must all share one or more features and
there should be no other sounds in the language that have this feature or combination of features.


term: Nominal, definition: A nominal is a word which differs grammatically from a noun but functions as one.

term: Nonfuture Tense, definition: Nonfuture tense is an absolute tense that

refers to a time at or before the moment of utterance, and
contrasts with a future tense.


term: Noun Adjunct, definition: A noun adjunct is a noun that functions as a modifier of a noun.

term: Necessity, definition: Necessity is a degree of contingency in modality that in

alethic modality connotes logical requirement
deontic modality connotes obligation, and
epistemic modality connotes certainty.


term: Nominal Clause, definition: A nominal clause is a subordinate clause that functions as a noun phrase.

term: Nonpast Tense, definition: Nonpast tense is an absolute tense that

refers to a time at or after the moment of utterance, and
contrasts with a past tense.


term: Noun Class, definition: A noun class system is a grammatical system that some languages use to overtly categorize nouns. Noun classes are

often based, at least in part, on characteristics (such as gender, animacy, shape) of the referents of some of the nouns in each class, and
distinguished by
	
an affix on the noun or by a clitic or word in the noun phrase, and
agreement affixes on noun phrase constituents and on the verb.




term: Negation, definition: Negation is a morphosyntactic operation in which a lexical item denies or inverts the meaning of another lexical item or construction.
A negator is a lexical item that expresses negation.

term: Nominalization, definition: A nominalization is a noun phrase that has a systematic correspondence with a clausal predication which includes a head noun morphologically related to a corresponding verb.

term: Nonrecent Past Tense, definition: Nonrecent past tense is a past tense that refers to a time before the range of a contrasting recent past tense.

term: Noun Phrase, definition: A noun phrase is a phrase that has a noun as its head.

term: Negative Conditional Relation, definition: A negative conditional relation is a conditional relation

in which the consequent is related to the opposite meaning of the antecedent, and
that is marked on
	
the antecedent to carry the meaning equivalent to "unless," or
the consequent to carry the meaning equivalent to "otherwise."




term: Nominative Case, definition: Nominative case is the case that identifies clause subjects in nominative-accusative languages. Nouns used in isolation have this case.

term: Nonremote Past Tense, definition: Nonremote past tense is a past tense that refers to a time considered not more than a few days ago, in contrast to a remote past tense.

term: Nuclear Syllable, definition: A nuclear syllable is a syllable that carries maximum prominence, usually due to being stressed.

term: Negative Purpose Relation, definition: A negative purpose relation is a means-purpose relation in which the expressed intent is avoidance of a state or event. The state or event to be avoided is marked by a form equivalent to the meaning of "lest."

term: Nonconventional Implicature, definition: An nonconventional implicature is a implicature that is drawn in accordance with pragmatic principles, such as the cooperative principle or the informativeness principle, rather than the meaning of a lexical item or expression.

term: Nonrestrictive Relative Clause, definition: A  nonrestrictive relative clause is a relative clause that does not aid in the identification of the referent of its head noun, but only provides information about it.

term: Number, definition: Number is a grammatical category of nouns, pronouns, and verb agreement that expresses count distinctions (such as "one" or "more than one").
The count distinctions typically, but not always, correspond to the actual count of the referents of the marked noun or pronoun.

term: Neuter Gender, definition: Neuter gender is a grammatical gender that

includes those nouns having referents which do not have distinctions of sex, and
often includes some which do have a natural sex distinction.


term: Nonconversational Implicature, definition: A nonconversational implicature is a nonconventional implicature that arises from the operation of a principle or maxim of language usage other than the cooperative principle and conversational maxims, such as an implicature derived from an assumption of the informativeness principle.

term: Nonspecificity, definition: Nonspecificity is a kind of definiteness, expressed by an interpretation of or grammatical marking on a noun or noun phrase, indicating that the speaker presumably does not know the identity of the referent(s).

term: Numeral, definition: A numeral is a word, functioning most typically as an adjective or pronoun, that expresses a

number, and
relation to the number, such as one of the following:
	
Quantity
Sequence
Frequency
Fraction




term: Object, definition: 
An object, traditionally defined, is either a direct object or an indirect object.
An object, in some usages, is any grammatical relation other than subject.


term: Offprint, definition: An offprint is a separate reprint of an article that first appeared as part of a larger publication.

term: Open Presupposed Proposition, definition: An open presupposed proposition is a presupposition that contains a variable about which the utterance supplies information.

term: Other-Repair, definition: An other-repair is a repair made by a participant other than the one whose speech is repaired.

term: Object Complement, definition: An object complement is a complement that is used to predicate a description of the direct object.

term: Oh-Receipt, definition: 


An oh-receipt is a move (such as the utterance of oh in English) that signals a sharp change in the state in the speaker’s knowledge, such as the

overcoming of a previous expectation, or
achievement of a new understanding resulting from new information.





term: Opposite Lexical Relation, definition: An opposite lexical relation is an association between two lexical units which have the opposite core meanings in some contexts.

term: Out-Of-Field Distinction, definition: An out-of-field distinction is a distinction in place deixis that indicates that the location is not in visual range.

term: Obligative Mood, definition: Obligative mood is a directive mood that signals the speaker's estimation of the necessity that the proposition expressed in his or herutterance be brought about.

term: Onomatopoeia, definition: Onomatopoeia is the use of a word that denotes a

sound suggested by the phonetic quality of the word, or
thing that produces such a sound.


term: Optative Mood, definition: Optative mood is a volitive mood that signals wishing or hoping.

term: Overall Organization, definition: An overall organization is a schematic description of a kind of conversational encounter. It describes the types and order of a conversation’s turns and sequences.

term: Oblique Object, definition: An oblique object is a grammatical relation proposed for a noun phrase clause constituent with the following characteristics:

Its nature and behavior are more readily describable in semantic terms than syntactic.
It is likely to be the most constrained in the semantic roles it may individually express.
It is likely to be marked by an adposition or case affix.
It is not likely to be a target of syntactic rules, such as
	
agreement with the verb, or
strategies of relativization.




term: Onset, definition: An onset is the part of the syllable that precedes the vowel of the syllable.

term: Ordinal Numeral, definition: An ordinal numeral is a numeral belonging to a class whose members designate positions in a sequence.

term: Overlap, definition: Overlap is simultaneous talk by two or more conversational participants, irrespective of its status in participants’ minds as an interruption.

term: Obliterative Overlap, definition: An obliterative overlap is an overlap that is intended to blot out some portion of the speech of another participant.

term: Ontological Metaphor, definition: An ontological metaphor is a metaphor in which an abstraction, such as an activity, emotion, or idea, is represented as something concrete, such as an object, substance, container, or person.

term: Orientational Metaphor, definition: An orientational metaphor is a metaphor in which concepts are spatially related to each other, as in the following ways:

Up or down
In or out
Front or back
On or off
Deep or shallow
Central or peripheral


term: Oxymoron, definition: An oxymoron is a collocation of words that have contradictory or sharply incongruous meanings.

term: Obviative Person Deixis, definition: 


Obviative person deixis is third person deixis that distinguishes a less important referent in the present stage of the discourse from a referent that is more important.
 



 

term: Open Class, definition: An open class is a grammatical class of words with a potentially unlimited membership. These words have content meaning.

term: Other-Initiated Repair, definition: An other-initiated repair is a repair that results from a process that was begun by the addressee of the repaired utterance.

term: Parable, definition: A parable is a brief allegory that is used to teach a moral lesson.

term: Permissible Mixed Metaphors, definition: Permissible mixed metaphors are mixed metaphors that do not conflict with each other because they

serve the same purpose, and
exhibit a correlation with each other.


term: Postpositional Phrase, definition: A postpositional phrase is an adpositional phrase in which a postposition is the head. The postposition follows its complement.
The phrase is an exocentric construction that functions as an adjectival or adverbial modifier. The complement to the postposition is typically one of the following:

Noun
Noun phrase
Pronoun


term: Presupposition Denial, definition: A presupposition denial is a noncontradictory negation of a presupposition in a clause by an assertion in another clause.

term: Paradigm, definition: 1. A set of forms having a common root or stem, of which one form must be selected in certain grammatical environments.
2. The set of substitutional relationships a linguistic unit has with other units in a specific context.
 
 
 

term: Permissive Mood, definition: Permissive mood is a directive mood that signals the speaker’s act of giving permission.

term: Potential Implicature, definition: A potential implicature is an implicature that would arise from any of the components of a givenutterance if that component were uttered in some linguistic or extralinguistic context, whether or not the implicature is an actual implicature of the given utterance.

term: Presupposition Suspension, definition: A presupposition suspension is the speaker's removal of a previously implied commitment to a presupposition without the denial of it.

term: Paradigmatic Lexical Relation, definition: A paradigmatic lexical relation is a culturally determined pattern of association between lexical units that

share one or more core semantic components
belong to the same lexical category
fill the same syntactic position in a syntactic construction, and
have the same semantic function.


term: Person Deixis, definition: Person deixis is deictic reference to the participant role of a referent, such as

the speaker
the addressee, and
referents which are neither speaker nor addressee.


term: Potential Presupposition, definition: A potential presupposition is a presupposition that is triggered by some part of an utterance (such as a subordinate clause) taken in isolation, but that may or may not be a presupposition of the whole utterance.
 

term: Presupposition Trigger, definition: A presupposition trigger is a construction or item that signals the existence of a presupposition in an utterance.

term: Paradox, definition: A paradox is a proposition that is or appears to be contradictory but expresses some measure of truth.

term: Personal Pronoun, definition: A personal pronoun is a pronoun that expresses a distinction of person deixis.

term: Pragmatics, definition: Pragmatics is the study of the aspects of meaning and language use that are dependent on thespeaker, the addressee and other features of the context of utterance, such as the following:

The effect that the following have on the speaker’s choice of expression and the addressee’s interpretation of an utterance:
	
Context of utterance
Generally observed principles of communication
The goals of the speaker




Programmatic concerns, such as
	
the treatment of given versus new information, including presupposition
deixis
speech acts, especially illocutionary acts
implicature, and
the relations of meaning or function between portions of discourse (seeinterpropositional relation) or turns of conversation (see conversation analysis).




term: Preterit, definition: A preterit, in traditional terminology, is a simple past tense not marked for aspect or modality.

term: Paralipsis, definition: Paralipsis is a kind of irony in which the speaker proposes not to speak of a matter, but still somehow reveals it.

term: Personification, definition: Personification is an ontological metaphor in which a thing or abstraction is represented as a person.

term: Preannouncement, definition: A preannouncement is a presequence for an announcement of news.
It consists of a turn in which the announcing participant checks on the newsworthiness of the item, and may also consist of a turn in which the recipient allows or disallows the newsworthiness of the item before beginning a request-acceptance or question-answer sequence to elicit the announcement.
 

term: Previousness Relation, definition: A previousness relation is a temporal relation in which the event or state of a latter-expressed proposition is communicated to have occurred before the event or state of a prior-expressed proposition.

term: Parataxis, definition: Parataxis is the juxtaposition of syntactic units without use of a conjunction.

term: Pesky Little Particle, definition: A pesky little particle is a morpheme that is either

lexically contentless, or
behaves in a text in a manner that is anomalous with regard to its usual lexical content, and is intractable to grammatical analysis.

Therefore, it usually has a discourse or pragmatic function.

term: Prearrangement, definition: A prearrangement is a presequence in which an attempt is made to arrange for later contact, as by means of a question-answer sequence determining the availability of one of the participants.
 

term: Primary Sense, definition: A primary sense is the core, basic, literal meaning of a lexeme.

term: Parenthesis Relation, definition: A parenthesis relation is an interpropositional relation in which some proposition(s) is a digression from those expressed before and after.

term: Phone, definition: A phone is an unanalyzed sound of a language. It is the smallest identifiable unit found in a stream of speech that is able to be transcribed with an IPA symbol.

term: Precategorial Class, definition: The precategorial class is a category for a lexical item that needs more analysis before it can be assigned a more specific category in the Parts of Speech authority list.

term: Pro-Adjective, definition: A pro-adjective is a pro-form that substitutes for an adjective or adjective phrase.

term: Paronomasia, definition: Paronomasia is the use of words that sound similar to other words, but have different meanings.

term: Phoneme, definition: A phoneme is the smallest contrastive unit in the sound system of a language.

term: Precative Mood, definition: Precative mood is a directive mood that signals that the utterance is a request.

term: Pro-Adverb, definition: A pro-adverb is a pro-form that substitutes for an adverb or other expression having an adverbial function.

term: Part-Whole Schema, definition: A part-whole schema is an image schema involving physical or metaphorical wholes along with their parts and a configuration of the parts.

term: Phonetically Similar Segment, definition: Phonetically similar segments are two or more sounds which share phonetic features and are frequently found as variants of a single phonological unit in a language.

term: Preclosing, definition: A preclosing is a presequence that signals the end of a conversation is near. It provides opportunity for the discussion of any additional remaining topic before the participants proceed with the closing sequence.

term: Pro-Form, definition: A pro-form is a word, substituting for other words, phrases, clauses, or sentences, whose meaning is recoverable from the linguistic or extralinguistic context.

term: Participant Role, definition: A participant role is a relation that persons have to each other with regards to their involvement in a speech event.

term: Phonetics, definition: Phonetics is the study of human speech sounds.
Branches


Articulatory phonetics
The study of how speech sounds are produced by the human vocal apparatus.


Acoustic phonetics
The study of the sound waves made by the human vocal organs for communication.


Auditory phonetics
The study of how speech sounds are perceived by the ear, auditory nerve, and brain.



term: Predicate, definition: A predicate is the portion of a clause, excluding the subject, that expresses something about the subject.

term: Pro-Verb, definition: A pro-verb is a pro-form that substitutes for a verb or predicate.

term: Participle, definition: A participle is a lexical item, derived from a verb, that has some of the characteristics and functions of both verbs and adjectives.
The adjectival form of the term participle is participial.
 

term: Phonological Derivation, definition: A phonological derivation is the set of stages used to generate the phonetic representation of a word from its underlying representation.

term: Predicate Adjective, definition: A predicate adjective is an adjective that is used to predicate an attribute of the subject.

term: Procedural Discourse, definition: A procedural discourse is a discourse that

is used to tell the addressee how to do something
presents a series of steps leading to a goal, and
centers on events that are contingent one on another, rather than focusing on the performer of the events.


term: Particle, definition: A particle is a word that

does not belong to one of the main classes of words
is invariable in form, and
typically has grammatical or pragmatic meaning.


term: Phonological Hierarchy, definition: Phonological hierarchy is a ranking that organizes a stream of speech into levels of ascending size and complexity.
Here are the levels of the phonological hierarchy:

Units at one level of the hierarchy cluster together to form units of the next higher level. At each level, speech can be segmented into units that have similar kinds of phonetic features.

term: Predicate Noun, definition: A predicate noun is a noun (or noun phrase) that is used to predicate a description or identification of the subject.

term: Procedural Text, definition: A procedural text is a text which gives instructions on how to do something.

term: Particularized Implicature, definition: A particularized implicature is a conversational implicature that is derivable only in a specific context.

term: Phonological Symmetry, definition: Phonological symmetry is the even distribution of phonemes throughout the articulatory possibilities of a given language.

term: Predicator, definition: A predicator is the verb in its functional relation to the clause. It is comparable to the grammatical relations of subject and object.

term: Proclitic, definition: A proclitic is a clitic that precedes the word to which it is phonologically joined.

term: Partitive Case, definition: Partitive case is a case that expresses the partial nature of the referent of the noun it marks, as opposed to expressing the whole unit or class of which the referent is a part.
This case may be found in items such as the following:

Existential clauses
Nouns that are accompanied by numerals or units of measure
Predications of material from which something is made

It often has a meaning similar to th English word some.

term: Phonological Universal, definition: A phonological universal is a common tendency found in the phonological systems of many languages.

term: Predictable Information, definition: Predictable information is given information that the speaker assumes can be or could have been predicted by the addressee to occur in a particular position in the sentence.

term: Productive Affix, definition: A productive affix is a derivational affix that is currently used in the derivation of new words.

term: Partitive Numeral, definition: A partitive numeral is a numeral that expresses a fraction.

term: Phonology, definition: Phonology is the study of how sounds are organized and used in natural languages.

term: Predictive Future Tense, definition: Predictive future tense is a future tense, used in predictions, that does not express intention.

term: Progressive Aspect, definition: Progressive aspect is a continuous aspect that expresses processes, not states.

term: Passing Turn, definition: A passing turn is a move that

indicates that its speaker has nothing further to say, and
passes speakership to another participant.


term: Phrasal Verb, definition: A phrasal verb is a combination of a lexical verb and a verbal particle that forms a single semantic and syntactic unit.

term: Preface, definition: A preface is an audible device, such as one of the following, used within a turn to put off a dispreferred response:

Items like well
Token agreement
Indications of appreciation, apology, or qualification
Self-repair


term: Prohibitive Mood, definition: Prohibitive mood is a directive mood that signals a prohibition. It is distinguished by

the use of a negated imperative sentence that employs a negative marker distinct from that used in declarative sentences, or
a verb form different from that of the imperative.


term: Passive Voice, definition: Passive voice is a voice that indicates that the subject is the patient or recipient of the action denoted by the verb.

term: Phrase, definition: A phrase is a syntactic structure that consists of more than one word but lacks the subject-predicate organization of a clause.

term: Preferred Second Part, definition: A preferred second part is a second part of an adjacency pair that

consists of a sort of response to the first part that is not avoided by participants, and

is less likely than a dispreferred second part to be formally marked by such features as

delays
prefaces, and
accounts.




term: Prolative Case, definition: Prolative case is a case that expresses motion along or by the referent of the noun it marks.

term: Past Perfect Tense, definition: Past perfect tense is an absolute-relative tense that refers to a time in the past relative to a reference point, which itself is in the past relative to the moment of utterance.

term: Pitch, definition: Pitch is the rate of vibration of the vocal folds.

term: Prefix, definition: A prefix is an affix that is joined before a root or stem.

term: Pronominal, definition: A pronominal is a phrase that functions as a pronoun.
Note: The term pronominal is also used as an adjective to mean "of, constituting, or resembling a pronoun."

term: Past Tense, definition: Past tense is an absolute tense that refers to a time before the moment of utterance.

term: Place Deixis, definition: Place deixis is deictic reference to a location relative to the location of a participant in the speech event, typically the speaker.

term: Prefixation, definition: Prefixation is a morphological process whereby a bound morpheme is attached to the front of a root or stem.
The kind of affix involved in this process is called a prefix.

term: Pronoun, definition: A pronoun is a pro-form which functions like a noun and substitutes for a noun or noun phrase.]
`

term: Path, definition: Path is the semantic role describing the locale(s) transversed in motion or propulsion predications.

term: Place Of Articulation, definition: Place of articulation is the relationship between the active and passive articulators as they shape or impede the airstream.

term: Prehesternal Past Tense, definition: Prehesternal past tense is a past tense that refers to a time in some span before that of an opposing hesternal past tense.

term: Proper Noun, definition: A proper noun is a noun that is the name of a specific individual, place, or object.

term: Path Schema, definition: A path schema is an image schema that

involves physical or metaphorical movement from place to place, and
consists of a starting point, a goal, and a series of intermediate points.


term: Plural Number, definition: Plural number is number that expresses reference to a quantity greater than that expressed by the largest specific number category in a language, such as "more than one" in English, and "more than two" in some other languages.

term: Prehodiernal Past Tense, definition: Prehodiernal past tense is a past tense that refers to a time in some span before that of a contrasting hodiernal past tense.

term: Proportional Relation, definition: A proportional relation is a logical relation that establishes a range of conditional relations that together involve direct or inverse correlation.

term: Patient As A Semantic Role, definition: Patient is a semantic role that is usually the surface object of the verb in a sentence.

term: Polarity, definition: Polarity is a grammatical category that distinguishes affirmative and negative.

term: Preinvitation, definition: A preinvitation is a presequence that is likely to be understood by the respondent as a signal of a coming invitation. The coming invitation may be a question-answer sequence concerning the availability of the participant to be invited.
 

term: Proposition, definition: A proposition is that part of the meaning of a clause or sentence that is constant, despite changes in such things as the voice or illocutionary force of the clause.
A proposition may be related to other units of its kind through interpropositional relations, such as temporal relations and logical relations.

term: Perfect, definition: A perfect is a grammaticalization of the current relevance, at the moment of utterance, of an event or state that occurred prior to the moment of utterance.

term: Politeness, definition: Politeness is social deixis that expresses a low degree of solidarity between the speaker and the addressee.

term: Prenasalization, definition: 



Prenasalization is the addition of a short nasal onset to a plosive or affricate at the same place of articulation.





term: Propositional Act, definition: A propositional act is a speech act that a speaker performs when referring or predicating in an utterance.

term: Perfect Of Persistent Situation, definition: A perfect of persistent situation is a grammaticalization of the current relevance of a state or event begun prior to the moment of utterance, which is relevant because of its continuation until the moment of utterance.

term: Polysynthetic Language, definition: A polysynthetic language is a language in which words tend to consist of several morphemes.

term: Preparatory Condition, definition: A preparatory condition is a state of affairs that

must be presupposed by the speaker in employing a particular illocutionary force, and

is a necessary condition for the nondefective employment of that force

including any conditions necessary due to the mode of achievement, but

excluding any limitations regarding the

nature of the propositional content of the illocutionary act (because these relate to its content, not its force), and
presuppositions of the speaker's sincerity in performing it.






term: Propositional Content Condition, definition: A propositional content condition is a limitation on the nature of the state of affairs described by the propositional content of an illocutionary act due to the nature of the illocutionary force employed

term: Perfect Of Recent Past, definition: A perfect of recent past is a grammaticalization of the current relevance of a state or event, occurring before the moment of utterance, which is relevant due to its proximity in time to the moment of utterance.

term: Portmanteau Morph, definition: A portmanteau morph is a single morph that is analyzed as representing two underlying morphemes.
 

term: Preposition, definition: A preposition is an adposition that occurs before its complement.

term: Prospective, definition: A prospective is a grammaticalization of the relationship of a present state to a future situation. It indicates that one is in a present state of being about to do something.

term: Perfect Of Result, definition: A perfect of result is a grammaticalization of the current relevance of a state or event, occurring before the moment of utterance, which is relevant because of a resulting state at the moment of utterance.

term: Position, definition: A position is an abstract place of one turn relative to another turn to which it is functionally related.
The place does not vary with the number or size of any insertion sequences that come between these functionally related turns.
 

term: Prepositional Phrase, definition: A prepositional phrase is an adpositional phrase in which a preposition is the head. The preposition precedes its complement.
The phrase is an exocentric construction that functions as an adjectival or adverbial modifier. The complement to the preposition is typically one of the following:

Noun
Noun phrase
Pronoun


term: Prototype, definition: The prototype of any category is the member or set of members of a category that best represents the category as a whole.

term: Perfective Aspect, definition: Perfective aspect is an aspect that expresses a temporal view of an event or state as a simple whole, apart from the consideration of the internal structure of the time in which it occurs.

term: Possessive Noun, definition: A possessive noun is a noun that expresses possession.
 

term: Prerequest, definition: A prerequest is a presequence that prefigures a request, possibly by ascertaining the ability of the respondent to satisfy the coming request.

term: Proximal, definition: A proximal is a distinction in place deixis that indicates location close to the speaker or other deictic center.

term: Performative, definition: A performative is a sentence in which the employment of a particular illocutionary force is made explicit by naming the force in the sentence itself.

term: Possessive Pronoun, definition: A possessive pronoun is a pronoun that expresses ownership and relationships like ownership, such as

kinship, and
other forms of association.


term: Present Tense, definition: Present tense is an absolute tense that refers to the moment of utterance. It often refers to events or states that do not merely coincide with the moment of utterance, such as those that are

continuous
habitual, or
lawlike.


term: Proximal-Distal Dimension, definition: A proximal-distal dimension is a distinction in place deixis that indicates distance from the speaker or other deictic center.

term: Performative Verb, definition: A performative verb is a verb that names an illocutionary force. It is used in a performative to perform an illocutionary act having that force.

term: Possibility, definition: Possibility is a degree of contingency in modality that in

alethic modality connotes logical possibility
deontic modality connotes permission, and
epistemic modality connotes uncertainty or speculation.


term: Presequence, definition: Here are two senses of presequence:


A presequence is a sequence that

is used to introduce a conversational action, and
often prefigures a particular sort of action and secures the addressee's cooperation.


A presequence is the specific turn that has the function of prefiguring the coming action.


term: Proximate Person Deixis, definition: Proximate person deixis is a third person deixis that distinguishes a referent that is more important at the present stage of the discourse from a referent that is less important.

term: Perlocutionary Act, definition: A perlocutionary act is a speech act that produces an effect, intended or not, achieved in an addressee by a speaker’s utterance.

term: Post-Hodiernal Future Tense, definition: Post-hodiernal future tense is a future tense that refers to a time, in relation to the moment ofutterance, after the span that is culturally defined as "today."
 

term: Prespan-End Relation, definition: A prespan-end relation is a temporal relation in which an event or state is expressed as marking the termination of a durative event or state.

term: Pseudo-Cleft Sentence, definition: A pseudo-cleft sentence is a kind of cleft sentence in which the subordinated clause is a relative clause headed by an interrogative pro-form. In English they are of the form:

wh-relative clause + be + X

X can be a constituent of one of many varieties.
The so-called 'inverted' pseudo-cleft sentence reverses the order of the two constituents:

 X + be + wh-relative clause


term: Perlocutionary Failure, definition: Perlocutionary failure is a lack of success in achieving an intended perlocutionary effect.

term: Post-Sequence, definition: A post-sequence is a sequence that is subordinate to and follows another sequence. It remedies some unresolved matter relating to the dominant sequence.
 

term: Presupposition, definition: A presupposition is background belief, relating to an utterance, that

must be mutually known or assumed by the speaker and addressee for the utterance to be considered appropriate in context
generally will remain a necessary assumption whether the utterance is placed in the form of an assertion, denial, or question, and
can generally be associated with a specific lexical item or grammatical feature (presupposition trigger) in the utterance.


term: Pun, definition: A pun is a variety of a usually humorous play on words involving

the multiple meanings of an expression, or
two expressions that sound similar.


term: Perlocutionary Verb, definition: A perlocutionary verb is a verb that names a perlocutionary act.

term: Postposition, definition: A postposition is an adposition that occurs after its complement.
 

term: Quality Implicature, definition: A quality implicature is a conversational implicature based on the addressee's assumption as to whether or not the speaker is observing or flouting the conversational maxim of quality.
If the speaker is assumed to be observing the maxim, then the addressee makes a standard implicature. If the speaker is assumed to be flouting the maxim, then the addressee makes a more nonstandard type of implicature.

term: Quantity Implicature, definition: A quantity implicature is a conversational implicature based on an addressee's assumption as to whether the speaker is observing or flouting the conversational maxim of quantity.
If the speaker is assumed to be observing the maxim, then the addressee makes a standard implicature. If the speaker is assumed to be flouting the maxim, then the addressee makes a more non-standard type of implicature.

term: Question, definition: Here are two senses of question:

A question is an illocutionary act that has a directive illocutionary point of attempting to get the addressee to supply information.
A question is a sentence type that has a form (labeled interrogative) typically used to express an illocutionary act with the directive illocutionary point mentioned above. It may be actually so used (as a direct illocution), or used rhetorically.


term: Quotative Evidential, definition: A quotative evidential is an evidential that signals that someone else is the source of the statement made.

term: Quantifier, definition: A quantifier is a determiner that expresses a referent's definite or indefinite number or amount.
A quantifier functions as a

modifier of a noun, or
pronoun.


term: Range As A Semantic Role, definition: Range is the semantic role of the entity that completes, is a product of, or further specifies an event.

term: Reference Clause, definition: 



Here are two senses of a reference clause:

A reference clause is a clause with an argument that, in a marking clause elsewhere in the sentence, is signaled as being coreferential or not to the argument of the marking clause.
In a language having a switch reference system, a reference clause is a clause with an argument, which is typically the subject.






term: Relative Clause, definition: A relative clause is a clause which describes the referent of a head noun or pronoun. It often restricts the reference of the head noun or pronoun.

term: Remote Past Tense, definition: Remote past tense is a past tense that refers to a time considered more than a few days ago.

term: Range Of Reference, definition: A range of reference is a collection of all possible entities in the referential realm denoted by a lexical unit.

term: Reference Grammar, definition: 



A reference grammar is a prose-like description of the major grammatical constructions in a language, illustrated with examples.





term: Relative Future Tense, definition: Relative future tense is a relative tense that refers to a time located after a contextually determined temporal reference point, regardless of the latter’s relation to the moment of utterance.

term: Repair, definition: 



A repair is an alteration that is suggested or made by a speaker, the addressee, or audience in order to correct or clarify a previous conversational contribution.
It may occur at any of several points following the contribution in question, perhaps occurring in accordance with a conventional order of preference.





term: Rank, definition: Rank is the relationship between units that refer to different values of some variable underlying property such as the following:

Degree
Grade
Relative position
Social position
Stratum


term: Referent, definition: 



A referent is the concrete object or concept that is designated by a word or expression. A referent is an object, action, state, relationship, or attribute in the referential realm.





term: Relative Nonfuture Tense, definition: Relative nonfuture tense is a relative tense that refers to a time simultaneous to, or before, a contextually determined temporal reference point, regardless of the latter's relation to the moment of utterance.

term: Repartee Discourse, definition: Repartee discourse is a discourse that is used to recount a series of speech exchanges.

term: Rank Lexical Relation, definition: A rank lexical relation is an association between lexical units which have different relative values based on some shared underlying semantic property.

term: Referent Honorific, definition: 



A referent honorific is an honorific for which both the referent and the target of the expression of relative social status are the same.





term: Relative Nonpast Tense, definition: Relative nonpast tense is a relative tense that refers to a time simultaneous to, or after, a contextually determined temporal reference point, regardless of the latter's relation to the moment of utterance.

term: Restatement Relation, definition: A restatement relation is an interpropositional relation in which a proposition(s) substantially paraphrases another proposition(s).

term: Ratified Participant, definition: 



A ratified participant is one who, in a speech event, has the role of





speaker
addressee, or
intended audience.


 




term: Referential Realm, definition: 



The referential realm is anything, real or imagined, that a person may talk about.





term: Relative Past Tense, definition: 



Relative past tense is a relative tense that refers to a time located before that of a contextually determined temporal reference point.





term: Restraint Removal Schema, definition: 



A restraint removal schema is a force schema that involves the physical or metaphorical

removal of a barrier to the action of a force, or
absence of a barrier that was potentially present.






term: Realis Modality, definition: Realis modality is a modality that connotes the factuality of a proposition.

term: Reflexive Pronoun, definition: A reflexive pronoun is a pronoun that has coreference with the subject.

term: Relative Present Tense, definition: Relative present tense is a relative tense that refers to a time that is simultaneous with some contextually determined temporal reference point.

term: Restrictive Relative Clause, definition: A restrictive relative clause is a relative clause that helps to identify the referent of the word that it modifies.

term: Reason-Result Relation, definition: A reason-result relation is a causal relation in which the propositions express an event or state that brings about another event or state. The result occurs regardless of human intention or nonintention.
 

term: Reflexive Verb, definition: A reflexive verb is a verb whose agent performs an action that is directed at itself. It characteristically takes a reflexive pronoun as its object.

term: Relative Pronoun, definition: A relative pronoun is a pronoun that

marks a relative clause
functions grammatically within the relative clause, and
is coreferential to the word modified by the relative clause.


term: Result, definition: A result is a semantic role that refers to that which is produced by an event.




This role is usually encoded as the surface object of a sentence.





term: Receiving Time, definition: Receiving time is the time at which an addressee hears or reads a message.
This time may be the deictic center for expressions of time deixis.

term: Reformulation, definition: A reformulation is a self-repair by means of a paraphrase of the repairable item.

term: Relative Tense, definition: Relative tense is a tense that refers to a time in relation to a contextually determined temporal reference point, regardless of the latter’s temporal relation to the moment of utterance.

term: Reverential Form, definition: 



A reverential form is an expression of social deixis that encodes very high status.





term: Recent Past Tense, definition: Recent past tense is a past tense that refers to a time, culturally and situationally defined, within the span ranging from yesterday to a week or a few months previous.

term: Rejection Finalizer, definition: A rejection finalizer is a move that signals the speaker's acceptance of a rejection by another participant.




The rejection may be of an offer that has previously been made to the other participant.





term: Relativizer, definition: 



A relativizer is a subordinating conjunction that links a relative clause to its head noun.
It is distinguishable from a relative pronoun in that it does not have a nominal function within the relative clause.





term: Rhetorical Question, definition: A rhetorical question is an illocutionary act that

has the direct illocutionary force of a question, and

is not generally used with the expectation of an answer but with some different, indirect force, such as

a command
a tentative statement, and
an evaluation.




term: Reciprocal Pronoun, definition: 



A reciprocal pronoun is a pronoun that expresses a mutual feeling or action among the referents of a plural subject.





term: Relational Proposition, definition: 



A relational proposition is a proposition that

arises as an implicature between two propositions or groups of propositions that are related by an interpropositional relation
expresses a relation
arises even where the relation is not signaled in the text, as by a conjunction, and
produces coherence in the text.






term: Relator, definition: 



A relator is a lexical item whose function is to show the relationship between its surrounding constructions.





term: Rhotacized Vowel, definition: A rhotacized vowel is a vowel colored with the sound of an r.

term: Reduplication, definition: Reduplication is a morphological process in which a root or stem or part of it is repeated.

term: Relational Social Deixis, definition: 



Relational social deixis is deictic reference to a social relationship between the speaker and an addressee, bystander, or other referent in the extralinguistic context.





term: Relevance Implicature, definition: 



A relevance implicature is a conversational implicature based on an addressee's assumption as to whether a speaker is observing or flouting the conversational maxim of relation or relevance.
If the speaker is assumed to be observing the maxim, then the addressee makes a standard implicature. If the speaker is assumed to be flouting the maxim, then the addressee makes a more nonstandard type of implicature.





term: Rime, definition: A rime is the part of a syllable which consists of its vowel and any consonant sounds that come after it.

term: Reference, definition: 



Here are two senses for reference:

Reference is the symbolic relationship that a linguistic expression has with the concrete object or abstraction it represents.
Reference is the relationship of one linguistic expression to another, in which one provides the information necessary to interpret the other.






term: Relative Adverb, definition: A relative adverb is a pro-adverb that marks a relative clause.

term: Remote Future Tense, definition: Remote future is a future tense that refers to a time that is considered relatively distant. It is characteristically after the span of time culturally defined as "tomorrow."

term: Root, definition: 



A root is the portion of a word that

is common to a set of derived or inflected forms, if any, when all affixes are removed
is not further analyzable into meaningful elements, being morphologically simple, and
carries the principle portion of meaning of the words in which it functions.






term: Salient Information, definition: 



Salient information is given information that the speaker assumes to be in the addressee's consciousness at the time of the speaker’s utterance.





term: Sequential Relation, definition: A sequential relation is a temporal relation in which the event or state of a latter-expressed proposition is communicated to have occurred after the event or state of a prior-expressed proposition.

term: Specificity, definition: Specificity is a kind of definiteness, expressed by the interpretation of or grammatical marking on a noun or noun phrase, indicating that the speaker presumably knows the identity of the referent(s).

term: Subtraction, definition: Subtraction is a morphological process of modification that removes one or more segments from a root or stem.

term: Same Subject Marker, definition: A same subject marker is a distinction in the verb morphology of a clause that indicates that the subject is identical to the subject of another clause, such as one of the following:

A following clause
The final clause in a clause chain
The main clause in a sentence


term: Serial Verb Construction, definition: A serial verb construction is a string of verbs or verb phrases within a single clause that

express simultaneous or immediately consecutive actions
have a single grammatical subject
have no connective markings, and
are marked or understood as having the same grammatical categories, such as

aspect
modality
negativity or positivity, and
tense



 

term: Speculative Mood, definition: Speculative mood is an epistemic mood that signals that the speaker judges from certain facts that the proposition expressed by his or her utterance is possibly true.

term: Success Of Fit, definition: Success of fit is a correspondence between the state of affairs described by the propositional content of an illocutionary act and the state of affairs in the world.

term: Setting Information, definition: Setting information is a kind of nonevent in discourse that provides locative, temporal and circumstantial information about a sequence of events.

term: Speech Act, definition: A speech act is an act that a speaker performs when making an utterance, including the following:

A general act (illocutionary act) that a speaker performs, analyzable as including:

the uttering of words (utterance acts)
making reference and predicating (propositional acts), and
a particular intention in making the utterance (illocutionary force)


An act involved in the illocutionary act, including utterance acts and propositional acts
The production of a particular effect in the addressee (perlocutionary act)


term: Suffix, definition: A suffix is an affix that is attached to the end of a root or stem.

term: Scalar Property Lexical Relation, definition: 



A scalar property lexical relation is an association between sets of lexical units which refers to the relative values for a property of an object or event as determined against a qualitative standard.





term: Silence, definition: 



Silence is the absence of speech.





term: Standard Implicature, definition: A standard implicature is a conversational implicature based on an addressee's assumption that the speaker is being cooperative by directly observing the conversational maxims.

term: Suffixation, definition: Suffixation is a morphological process whereby a bound morpheme is attached to the end of a stem.
The kind of affix involved in this process is called a suffix.

term: Scale Schema, definition: A scale schema is an image schema that

involves an increase or decrease of physical or metaphorical amount, and

consists of any of the following:

A closed- or open-ended progression of amount
A position in the progression of amount
One or more norms of amount
A calibration of amount




term: Similar Pair, definition: A similar pair is two words in which

phonetically similar segments occur in quite similar environments, and
no phonetically plausible rationale can be found to show how one of the segments has been modified by its environment.


term: State Of The Glottis, definition: The state of the glottis is the amount of:

vibration in the vocal folds, and
closure in the glottis.


term: Summary Relation, definition: A summary relation is a contraction relation in which a proposition(s) repeats, in abbreviated form, the information of a group of propositions previously expressed.

term: Second Part, definition: 



A second part is the second utterance in an adjacency pair.





term: Similarity Relation, definition: 



A similarity relation is an interpropositional relation indicating that the events or states expressed in the propositions have a likeness of function or import.





term: Statement, definition: Here are two senses for statement:

A statement is an illocutionary act that has the assertive illocutionary point of saying that some state of affairs is true.
A statement is a sentence having a form that is typically used to express such illocutionary acts (such as an English declarative sentence which has a subject followed by a verb).


term: Summons-Answer Sequence, definition: 



A summons-answer sequence is a pre-sequence that consists of a that turn

seeks attention, and
grants it, opening the way for the talk to follow.






term: Second Person Deixis, definition: Second person deixis is deictic reference to a person or persons identified as addressee.

term: Simile, definition: A simile is a comparison between two things.
It is signaled overtly; in English, a simile is expressed by the words like or as.

term: Stative Verb, definition: A stative verb is a verb that expresses a state of affairs or being rather than action.
Stative verbs differ from verbs of action not just in meaning but in formal structure and usage.

term: Superessive Case, definition: Superessive case is a case that expresses location on the referent of the noun it marks.
It has the meaning of "on" or "upon."

term: Secondary Articulation, definition: A secondary articulation is an additional articulation process that affects vowel or consonant production.

term: Simple Sentence, definition: A simple sentence is a sentence containing one main clause and no subordinate clauses.

term: Status, definition: Status is a scale of social standing that is often realized in differing socially deictic linguistic forms.

term: Superior Status, definition: 



Superior status is social deixis that encodes high status.





term: Secondary Sense, definition: A secondary sense is a meaning that is more abstract than a primary sense of a lexeme but still shares some of its semantic components.
Because it has a different range of reference, its usage contexts and collocates are different from those of a primary sense.

term: Simulfix, definition: A simulfix is a change or replacement of vowels or consonants (usually vowels) which changes the meaning of a word.

term: Stem, definition: A stem is the root or roots of a word, together with any derivational affixes, to which inflectional affixes are added.

term: Supplemental Information In A Definition, definition: Supplemental information is an optional part of the definition of a lexical unit, containing culturally or logically expected information.

term: Segment, definition: 



A segment is any discrete unit or phone, produced by the vocal apparatus, or a representation of such a unit.
 





term: Simultaneous Relation, definition: 



A simultaneous relation is a temporal relation in which the events or states of proposition(s) are communicated as occurring at the same time.





term: Stem Modification, definition: Stem modification is a morphological process whereby an affix occurs simultaneously with a root or stem.
The kind of affix involved in this process is called a simulfix.

term: Suppletion, definition: Suppletion is the replacement of one stem with another, resulting in an allomorph of a morpheme which has no phonological similarity to the other allomorphs.

term: Self-Initiated Repair, definition: Self-initiated repair is a repair that the speaker of the utterance that needs repair makes without a prompting from another participant.

term: Sincerity Condition, definition: 



A sincerity condition is the psychological state of the speaker concerning the propositional content of an illocutionary act.
The sincere or insincere expression of this state necessarily accompanies all illocutionary acts, except for an act having a declarative illocutionary point, so that an act having

an assertive point commits the speaker to having a state of belief
a commissive point commits the speaker to having a state of intention
a directive point commits the speaker to having a state of desire, and
an expressive point commits the speaker to having an emotional, attitudinal, or sensory state.






term: Still Tense, definition: Still tense is an absolute tense carrying the presupposition that an event or state held before the moment of utterance.
In positive declarative clauses, still tense asserts that the event or state holds at the moment of utterance.

term: Suprafix, definition: 



A suprafix is a kind of affix in which a suprasegmental is superimposed on one or more syllables of the root or stem, signalling a particular morphosyntactic operation.




This is a morphological process.









term: Self-Repair, definition: Self-repair is a repair that is performed by the speaker of the utterance that needs repair.

term: Singular Number, definition: 



Singular number is number that refers to one member of a designated class.





term: Stop, definition: A stop is a sound produced with a complete closure of the vocal tract.

term: Suprasegmental, definition: 



A suprasegmental is a vocal effect that extends over more than one sound segment in an utterance, such as pitch, stress, or juncture pattern.




In SIL contexts, suprasegmental is often used for

tone
vowel length, and
features like nasalization and aspiration.










term: Semantic Component, definition: A semantic component is a potentially contrastive part of the meaning of a lexical unit.

term: Singulative, definition: A singulative is a grammatical form, adjunct, or variant of a word that expresses the individuation of a single referent from a group or mass.

term: Strength Of Illocutionary Point, definition: Strength of illocutionary point is the strength of assertion of, commitment to bring about, direction to another to bring about, or expression of a psychological state toward the propositional content of an illocutionary act.

term: Switch Reference, definition: Switch reference is a grammatical category with the following features:


It signals the identity or nonidentity of the referent of an argument of one clause, usually its subject, with an argument of another clause, which is likewise usually the subject.
Switch reference functions to avoid ambiguity of reference; for example, it may distinguish between two referents that are third person and that, thus, may not be otherwise distinguished on the verb.

It relates clauses, usually adjacent, that may be subordinate or coordinate to one another.

It is expressed

usually by inflectional affixes on the verb
sometimes by the same affixes that express subject-verb agreement within the clause, and
rarely by a morpheme independent of the verb.




term: Semantic Role, definition: A semantic role is the underlying relationship that a participant has with the main verb in a clause.

term: Situational Elicitation Frame, definition: A situational elicitation frame is a hypothetical situation that is constructed to help you constrain and control what you elicit.

term: Strength Of Sincerity Conditions, definition: Strength of sincerity conditions is the strength of the psychological state that the speaker commits to in employing a particular illocutionary force.

term: Switching Pause, definition: A switching pause is silence between turns.

term: Semantics, definition: 



Here are two senses for semantics:

Semantics is, generally defined, the study of meaning of linguistic expressions.

Semantics is, more narrowly defined, the study of the meaning of linguistic expressions apart from consideration of the effect that pragmatic factors, such as the following, have on the meaning of language in use:

Features of the context
Conventions of language use
The goals of the speaker








term: Situationally Evoked Entity, definition: A situationally evoked entity is a referent that is given information because of the prominence of the referent in the extralinguistic context.

term: Stress, definition: Stress is an increase in the activity of the vocal apparatus of a speaker.

term: Syllabic Consonant, definition: A syllabic consonant is a phonetic element that normally patterns as a consonant, but may fill a vowel slot in a syllable.

term: Sense, definition: In LinguaLinks, the word "sense" is used in two ways:
1. In discussions about data storage and management,a sense is a structural part of a lexical entry. It contains the relevant semantic, grammatical, and anthropological information for a lexical unit.
     



Examples:

"add a sense to the entry"
"delete the sense"




2. In discussions about semantic analysis, a sense is the meaning of a lexical unit.







Examples:

                                              "define each sense of the lexeme"
                                              "compare lexically related senses"









term: Social Deixis, definition: Social deixis is reference to the social characteristics of, or distinctions between, the participants or referents in a speech event.

term: Strong Epistemic Qualification, definition: A strong epistemic qualification is an epistemic qualification that signals the highest degree of certainty.

term: Syllabification, definition: 



Syllabification is the process in which consonants function on the periphery of a syllable.





term: Sense Group, definition: A sense group is a collection of senses organized according


to lexical category


to conceptual extendedness, or


to semantic similarity.



term: Solidarity, definition: Solidarity is a scale of perceived like-mindedness or similarity of behavioral disposition between a speaker and addressee deriving from their similar:

backgrounds
acquaintance, or
personal characteristics, such as sex.

In some languages, solidarity affects the choice of expressions of social deixis.

term: Structural Metaphor, definition: A structural metaphor is a conventional metaphor in which one concept is understood and expressed in terms of another structured, sharply defined concept

term: Syllable, definition: 



A syllable is a unit of sound composed of







a central peak of sonority (usually a vowel), and
the consonants that cluster around this central peak.


term: Sense Type, definition: A sense type is a classification of a sense on the basis of its conceptual extendedness. In other words, it is a classification of the primary sense of a lexeme and the degree to which another sense is different from the primary sense.
Sense types provided in the lexical database are as follows:

Primary
Secondary
Figurative


term: Solutionhood Relation, definition: A solutionhood relation is an interpropositional relation in which a proposition(s) is presented as an answer or remedy for a problem, such as one of the following, communicated in another proposition(s):

A lack of information
A desire
An intellectual issue
A need
A calamity
A frustration


term: Subentry In A Lexical Database, definition: A subentry is a unit in the lexical database representing a lexeme that is made up of more than one morpheme, and is lexically related to one or more major entries.
While related to the major entry(s), the subentry contains its own phonological, semantic, grammatical, and anthropological information. The subentry usually has a meaning that is greater than the sum of its component morphemes.

term: Syllepsis, definition: A syllepsis is the use of a single word in such a way that it is syntactically related to two or more words elsewhere in the sentence, but has a different meaning in relation to each of the other words.

term: Sensory Evidential, definition: A sensory evidential is an evidential signaling that the speaker’s evidence for the truth of his or her statement is derived from the speaker’s own sensory experience.

term: Sonority Scale, definition: The sonority scale is a list of phonetic segments showing the relative resonance of phonetic segments in relation to other segments.

term: Subject, definition: A subject is a grammatical relation that exhibits certain independent syntactic properties, such as the following:

The grammatical characteristics of the agent of typically transitive verbs
The grammatical characteristics of the single argument of intransitive verbs
A particular case marking or clause position
The conditioning of an agreement affix on the verb
The capability of being obligatorily or optionally deleted in certain grammatical constructions, such as the following clauses:​

Adverbial
Complement
Coordinate


The conditioning of same subject markers and different subject markers in switch-reference systems
The capability of coreference with reflexive pronouns

The identification of the subject relation may be further confirmed by finding significant overlap with similar subject relations previously established in other languages. This may be done by analyzing correspondence between translation equivalents.

term: Symbolic Usage, definition: Symbolic usage is the use of a deictic expression in such a way that its interpretation depends only on general knowledge of the extralinguistic situation, rather than on physical (visual, and so forth) monitoring of it.

term: Sentence, definition: 



A sentence is a grammatical unit that is composed of one or more clauses.





term: Source As A Participant Role, definition: Source is the participant role of the referent from whom a message ultimately comes, especially in the case in which the referent is distinct from the speaker.

term: Subject Complement, definition: A subject complement is a complement that is used to predicate a description of the subject of a clause.

term: Synecdoche, definition: 



A synecdoche is a figure of speech in which the one of the following (or its reverse) is expressed:

A part stands for a whole
An individual stands for a class
A material stands for a thing






term: Sentence Adverb, definition: 



A sentence adverb is an adverb that modifies a whole sentence.





term: Source As A Semantic Role, definition: Source is the semantic role of the following referents:

The place of origin (with verbs of motion, locomotion, and propulsion)
The entity from which a physical sensation emanates (with verbs of sensation, attention, and speech)
The original owner in a transfer (with verbs of acquisition, transfer, and grab)


term: Subjunctive Mood, definition: Subjunctive mood is a mood that typically signals irrealis meanings, such as:

potentiality
uncertainty
prediction
obligation, and
desire

It most typically occurs in a subordinate clause, but may occur outside of one.

term: Synonym Lexical Relation, definition: 



A synonym lexical relation is a relationship between two or more lexical units which have identical core semantic components and which differ only with respect to their supplemental or peripheral components.





term: Sentence Elicitation Frame, definition: A sentence elicitation frame is a syntactic construction that has a blank left in it for eliciting or testing words.

term: Source Domain, definition: A source domain is a concept that is metaphorically used to provide the means of understanding another concept.

term: Subordinate Clause, definition: A subordinate clause is a clause that is embedded as a constituent of a matrix sentence and that functions like a noun, adjective, or adverb in the resultant complex sentence

term: Syntactic Category, definition: A syntactic category is a set of words and/or phrases in a language which share a significant number of common characteristics. The classification is based on similar structure and sameness of distribution (the structural relationships between these elements and other items in a larger grammatical structure), and not on meaning. In generative grammar, a syntactic category is symbolized by a node label in a constituent structure tree.

term: Sentential Complementation, definition: Sentential complementation is a kind of sentence in which one of the arguments of a verb is a clause. That clausal argument is called a complement clause.

term: Speaker, definition: A speaker is the utterer of a message.

term: Subordinating Conjunction, definition: A subordinating conjunction is a conjunction that links constructions by making one of them a constituent of another. The subordinating conjunction typically marks the incorporated constituent.

term: Syntactic Function, definition: A syntactic function is the grammatical relationship of one constituent to another within a syntactic construction.

term: Separable Affix, definition: A separable affix is an affix that can be detached from its stem and located elsewhere in a construction.

term: Specialized Figurative Text, definition: A specialized figurative text is a text belonging to one of several creative genres that makes extensive use of stylized, poetic, and figurative language.

term: Substance Metaphor, definition: A substance metaphor is an ontological metaphor in which an abstraction, such as an event, activity, emotion, or idea, is represented as material.

term: Syntagmatic Lexical Relation, definition: A syntagmatic lexical relation is a culturally determined pattern of association between pairs of lexical units (A1-B1, A2-B2, A3-B3…) where the


two members of each pair (A1 and B1)

have compatible semantic components
are in a fixed syntactic and semantic relationship to each other, and
are typically associated with each other, and



corresponding members of each pair (A1, A2, A3…)

belong to the same lexical category
fill the same syntactic position in a syntactic construction, and
have the same semantic function.






Structure


 

Syntagmatic lexical relations are structured in sets of pairs.





term: Sequence, definition: A sequence is a unit of conversation that consists of two or more adjacent and functionally related turns.

term: Specification Relation, definition: A specification relation is an elaboration relation in which a proposition provides more information about another proposition by restating it more narrowly.

term: Substantive, definition: A substantive is a broad classification of words that includes nouns and nominals.

term: Tag Question, definition: 



A tag question is a constituent that is added after a statement in order to request confirmation or disconfirmation of the statement from the addressee. Often it expresses the bias of the speaker toward one answer.




A tag question often includes a

be verb
predicate meaning ‘true’, and
negative.












term: Text Genre, definition: 



A text genre is a type of written or spoken discourse.





term: Token-Reflexive Deixis, definition: Token-reflexive deixis is discourse deixis in which the deictic expression refers to the expression or speech act in which it occurs.

term: Transverse, definition: A transverse is an expression of place deixis that indicates movement across the line of sight of the speaker.

term: Tag Statement, definition: 



A tag statement is an elliptical statement that follows and echoes a main clause statement.





term: Textually Evoked Entity, definition: 



A textually evoked entity is a referent that is given information because it has been previously included in the text.





term: Tone, definition: A tone is a pitch element or register added to a syllable to convey grammatical or lexical information.

term: Trial Number, definition: A trial number is a number that refers to three members of the designated class.

term: Target, definition: A target is the ultimate intended recipient of a speaker's message, especially when distinct from the addressee.

term: Theme, definition: A theme is the initial constituent of a sentence, viewed in relation to a more highly communicative theme or focus elsewhere in the sentence.

term: Topic, definition: 



A topic is a noun phrase that expresses what a sentence is about, and to which the rest of the sentence is related as a comment.





term: Trope, definition: 



A trope is the figurative use of an expression.





term: Target Domain, definition: A target domain is a semantic domain that is structured and understood metaphorically in terms of another domain.

term: Thesaurus Category, definition: 



A thesaurus category is an etic semantic category.





term: Transcription, definition: 



Transcription is the process of representing oral text in a written format.





term: Try-Marker, definition: A try-marker is a device that is used to indicate a test of the addressee's recognition of a referent. The device is followed by a hesitation pause in expectation of a sign from the addressee as to whether the referent is known to the addressee.

term: Temporal Relation, definition: A temporal relation is an interpropositional relation that communicates the simultaneity or ordering in time of events or states.

term: Third Person Deixis, definition: Third person deixis is deictic reference to a referent(s) not identified as the speaker or addressee.

term: Transitive Verb, definition: A transitive verb is a verb that takes a direct object.

term: Turn, definition: A turn is a time during which a single participant speaks, within a typical, orderly arrangement in which participants speak with minimal overlap and gap between them.

term: Tense, definition: Tense is a grammatical category, typically marked on the verb, that deictically refers to the time of the event or state denoted by the verb in relation to some other temporal reference point.

term: Third Turn Repair, definition: 



A third turn repair is a self-repair in a third conversational turn.
It is preceded by an initial turn in which the repairable item occurs and another turn in which the addressee or audience prompts for repair or produces an inadequate response.





term: Transitivity, definition: Transitivity is the number of objects a verb requires or takes in a given instance.

term: Turn Location, definition: 



A turn location is the actual place of a turn in a series. It is represented by a number obtained by counting from the initial turn of the series.





term: Time As A Semantic Role, definition: 



Time is the semantic role of the temporal placement of an event.











term: Translational Equivalence, definition: Translational equivalence is the similarity between a word (or expression) in one language and its translation in another. This similarity results from overlapping ranges of reference.
A translation equivalent is a corresponding word or expression in another language.

term: Twin-Pan Balance Schema, definition: A twin-pan balance schema is a balance schema that involves physical or metaphorical countervailing forces acting on either side of a fulcrum.

term: Text, definition: 



A text is a sequence of paragraphs that represents an extended unit of speech.





term: Time Deixis, definition: Time deixis is reference to time relative to a temporal reference point. Typically, this point is the moment of utterance.

term: Translative Case, definition: Translative case is a case indicating that the referent of the noun, or the quality of the adjective, that it marks is the result of a process of change.

term: Ultimate Constituent, definition: An ultimate constituent is one of the grammatically irreducible units that constitutes a construction.

term: Unbounded Deixis, definition: Unbounded deixis is a distinction in place deixis that indicates the lack of a defined border.

term: Unratified Participant, definition: 



An unratified participant is a person present at, but not a recognized participant of, a conversation or other speech event.





term: Usage Type, definition: 



A usage type is a classification for lexical units on the basis of sociolinguistic and historical factors.





term: Universal, definition: 



A universal principle is something that exists everywhere; something characteristic of all languages.




 

term: Unused Entity, definition: An unused entity is a referent referred to for the first time in the discourse, but assumed to be already a part of the addressee's knowledge.

term: Utterance, definition: 
An utterance is a natural unit of speech bounded by breaths or pauses.
An utterance is a complete unit of talk, bounded by the speaker's silence.


term: Unbound Stem, definition: An unbound stem is a stem which can occur by itself as a separate word. Another morpheme need not be affixed to it in order for it to be a word.

term: Unproductive Affix, definition: 



An unproductive affix is a derivational affix which is no longer used to form new words.





term: Upgrade, definition: 



An upgrade is a move that is intended to strengthen a previous utterance.





term: Utterance Act, definition: An utterance act is a speech act that consists of the verbal employment of units of expression such as words and sentences.

term: Valency, definition: Valency refers to the capacity of a verb to take a specific number and type of arguments (noun phrase positions).

term: Verbal Particle, definition: 



A verbal particle is a member of a closed class of particles which co-occur with some verbs to form phrasal verbs. In some languages, verbal particles are identical to certain adpositions.





term: Vocative Case, definition: Vocative case is a case that marks a noun whose referent is being addressed.

term: Volitive Modality, definition: 



Volitive modality is a deontic modality that expresses the speaker’s attitude of hope, wish, or fear concerning the proposition expressed by the utterance.





term: Verb (Linguistics), definition: A verb is a member of the syntactic class of words that

typically signal events and actions
constitute, singly or in a phrase, a minimal predicate in a clause
govern the number and types of other constituents which may occur in the clause, and

in inflectional languages, may be inflected for

tense
aspect
voice
modality, or

agreement with other constituents in

person
number, or
grammatical gender.






term: Vertical Deixis, definition: Vertical deixis is place deixis that indicates location upward or downward in relation to the speaker or other deictic center.

term: Vocoid, definition: 



A vocoid is a sound made with an open oral cavity such that there is little audible friction in the mouth.




It has the potential to be analyzed phonemically as a vowel.









term: Vowel, definition: 



A vowel is a sound made when the impedance of the air through the vocal tract is minimal and the vocal tract is completely open.





term: Verb Phrase, definition: 



Here are two senses for verb phrase:
1. In traditional terminology, a verb phrase is a phrase that

has the syntactic role of a simple verb, and
is composed of a main verb and auxiliary verbs or verbal particles related syntactically to the verb.

2. In generative grammar, a verb phrase is a syntactic unit that corresponds to the predicate. In addition to the verb, this includes auxiliaries, objects, object complements, and other constituents apart from the subject.





term: Verticality Schema, definition: A verticality schema is an image schema that involves “up” and “down” relations.

term: Voice, definition: Voice is a grammatical category that expresses the semantic functions attributed to the referents of a clause. It indicates whether the subject is an

actor
patient, or
recipient.


term: Vowel Harmony, definition: Vowel harmony is a type of assimilation which takes place when vowels come to share certain features with contrastive vowels elsewhere in a word or phrase (Crystal 1992 168 ).

term: Verbal Adjective, definition: A verbal adjective is an adjective which is similar to a verb in form and meaning.

term: Visual Evidential, definition: A visual evidential is a sensory evidential signaling that the speaker's evidence for the truth of his or her statement is derived from the speaker’s own sight.

term: Voiceless Vowel, definition: 



A voiceless vowel is a vowel that is produced with no vibration of the vocal folds.





term: Vowel Modification, definition: 



A vowel modification is an addition or alteration to the basic way that a vowel is articulated.





term: Verbal Noun, definition: A verbal noun is a noun that is morphologically related to a verb and similar to it in meaning.

term: Weak Epistemic Qualification, definition: 



A weak epistemic qualification is an epistemic qualification that signals the lowest degree of certainty.





term: Whole Presupposed Proposition, definition: A whole presupposed proposition is a presupposition that does not contain a variable to be instantiated.

term: Word, definition: 



A word is a unit which is a constituent at the phrase level and above. It is sometimes identifiable according to such criteria as

being the minimal possible unit in a reply

having features such as

a regular stress pattern, and
phonological changes conditioned by or blocked at word boundaries


being the largest unit resistant to insertion of new constituents within its boundaries, or
being the smallest constituent that can be moved within a sentence without making the sentence ungrammatical.

A word is sometimes placed, in a hierarchy of grammatical constituents, above the morpheme level and below the phrase level.





term: Writing And Style Manuals, definition: Writing and style manuals are reference guides for writers.
They contain information on

composition
grammar
punctuation, and
other relevant topics for writers.


term: Wh-Question, definition: 



A wh-question is a question that contains an interrogative pro-form.





term: Whole-Part Lexical Relation, definition: The whole-part lexical relation is an association between a lexical unit representing a part and a lexical unit representing its corresponding whole.

term: Yes-No Question, definition: A yes-no question is a question for which an answer of yes or no is acceptable.




In some languages, a yes-no question is formally distinguished by features, such as

rising sentence-final intonation
a sentence-initial or sentence-final particle
verb morphology
a difference of word order, such as the placement of the verb closer to the beginning of the sentence than in the declarative sentence, and
an interrogative clitic that attaches to the item in the sentence that is being questioned.





 

term: Zero, definition: Here are two senses for zero:

A zero is a constituent proposed in an analysis to represent an element held to be present at an abstract level but not realized in the data.
A zero is a unit proposed as a contrast to an element that might otherwise be present.


term: Zero Affix, definition: A zero affix is the member of a set of inflectional affixes which is represented by the absence of an expected morpheme.

term: Zero Anaphora, definition: 



Zero anaphora is the use of a gap, in a phrase or clause, that has an anaphoric function similar to a pro-form.










It is often described as “referring back” to an expression that supplies the information necessary for interpreting the gap.





term: Zero Morph, definition: A zero morph is a morph, consisting of no phonetic form, that is proposed in some analyses as an allomorph of a morpheme that is ordinarily realized by a morph having some phonetic form.

